Griffith College Dublin
A history of the campus 1813-2013

Griffith College Dublin
A history of the campus 1813-2013

by John Dorney
with contributions from
Pat McCarthy and Matthew Foyle

Published by
Griffith College Dublin, South Circular Road, Dublin 8, Ireland

www.gcd.ie
Copyright © Griffith College Dublin 2013
ISBN 9781906878078

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission in
writing of the publisher.

Map on page 8: © Ordnance Survey Ireland/Government of Ireland
Copyright Permit No. MP 0009913

Design & layout by Martin Keaney

www.keaneydesign.ie
Printed by Brunswick Press Ltd, Dublin

Contents
Introduction by Prof. Diarmuid Hegarty

5

Chapter 1 – The Richmond Bridewell 1813-1892

7

Chapter 2 – Wellington Barracks 1892-1922

25

Chapter 3 – Griffith Barracks in the Irish Civil War 1922-23

39

Chapter 4 – Griffith Barracks 1923-1991

55

Chapter 5 – Arthur Griffith

65

Chapter 6 – From Barracks to College

71

Bibliography

90

3

4

Introduction

A

s President of Griffith College it is my honour to
welcome you to this book which commemorates
the 200th anniversary of the historic buildings on
the Griffith College Dublin campus.
As this book outlines, the campus has a varied history. The
area was originally known as Grimswood’s Nurseries. In
1813 construction began on a remand prison, subsequently
known as the Richmond Bridewell, designed to relieve
pressure on Newgate Prison. The prison went on to house
famous Irish patriots including Daniel O’Connell, James
Stephens, Tom Steele and Thomas Francis Meagher.
Prisoners from the 1916 Easter Rising were temporarily
held in the jail which was then under control of the War
Department. During the Civil War the barracks came under attack a number of times.
Once Ireland had gained independence the site continued to be used as a barracks
and was one of the first to be returned to Irish control. The buildings were also used
by the Irish Amateur Boxing Association and housed the first unit of the ‘Emergency
Army’. The Office of Public Works and the Labour Court were both located at this site
at different stages until it was sold in 1991 and became Griffith College Dublin.
Since becoming Griffith College Dublin we have sought to combine the rich history
of the buildings that surround us with the academic objectives of the College. The site
has seen significant investment with student accommodation and a conference centre
complementing the original buildings.
In keeping with the history of the site, the campus retains multiple functions with
various voluntary bodies utilising the facilities along with other organisations. Now, as
Ireland’s largest private college with 7,000 students from Ireland and across the world,
the campus acts as a centre of the community.

Left: Griffith College – aerial view from 1991.

5

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank John Dorney and Matthew Foyle for
their work in putting this book together and in locating images, and to Pat McCarthy
and Brian Maye whose expert advice has supported their endeavours throughout
this work.
Finally this year, as we celebrate our 40th Anniversary as an academic institution
surrounded by 200 years of heritage, we look forward to developing both as a core of
the community and as a centre of education.
Ó bunaíodh an Coláiste rinne muid iarracht go mheabhrú agus a cheiliúradh ár stair
agus a fhorbairt i gcónaí le haghaidh ár todhchaí.

Professor Diarmuid Hegarty
President of Griffith College Dublin

6

Chapter 1
The Richmond Bridewell 1813-1892
Drawing of Daniel O’Connell and the Repeal Martyrs’
release and procession from The Richmond Bridewell, 1844.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

7

I

n the early part of the 19th century the site at what is now Griffith College was used by the Grimwood
family as a nursery. For most of the 19th century, however, the site on the South Circular Road was
a prison named the Richmond Bridewell. It was designed by the architect Francis Johnston, who
also designed the General Post Office, Nelson’s Pillar, and part of the Vice-Regal Lodge in the Phoenix
Park (now Áras an Uachtaráin) and the interiors of the Custom House. The Richmond Bridewell was
built to relieve pressure on the overcrowded Newgate Prison in Dublin.
Construction began in 1811 and continued until 1816, but the new prison was opened in 1813. The
initial construction of the buildings cost the city government some £42,000, a very considerable
outlay in those times. Cease to do evil; learn to do well was the motto over the door of the Richmond
Bridewell, leading to the satirical popular nickname for the prison, the ‘Cease to Do Evil Hotel’.
Conditions in the early years of the Richmond Bridewell were often brutal. A report of 1827, conducted
initially to investigate charges of Protestant proselytizing of Catholic prisoners, revealed a disturbing
series of cruel punishments. It found that the following ‘cruelties’ had been proved; confining prisoners
in a piggery day and night, handcuffing, depriving prisoners of blankets, the use of stocks in cold

An Ordnance Survey
map of 1837 shows the
Richmond Bridewell.
(Ordnance Survey Ireland
Government of Ireland)

8

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

A fragment of the original drawings by the architect Francis Johnston, dated 1813. (Courtesy of the Irish Architectural Archive)
Inset: a commemorative coin with the profile of Francis Johnston. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

weather, confining prisoners in a ‘cage’ in winter, keeping prisoners on a diet of bread and water as a
punishment, gagging, chaining wrists to ankles, use of the ‘iron helmet’ (a metal device which fitted
tightly around the head and face) and ‘strait waistcoats’ (straitjackets) .
In 1835 a solitary prison building, where prisoners would be confined for bad behaviour, was
constructed at the Bridewell at a cost of £8,000. Dublin city borrowed the sum from lenders in Britain
and did not pay it back until 1884.
The following year, 1836, another 114 cells were constructed for the main prison at the site at a cost
of a further £4,000. Heating by ‘hot water ducts’ was added in 1837.
The Richmond Bridewell was described in 1837 in the Topographical Dictionary of Ireland as:
The Richmond Bridewell, on the Circular Road, erected by the city at an expense of £40,000, is a spacious
structure enclosed by walls flanked with towers at the angles, and is entered by a massive gateway;
between the outer wall and the main building is a wide space, intended for a rope-walk; the interior
consists of two spacious quadrangles, the sides of which are all occupied by buildings; the cells, which
are on the first floor, open into corridors with entrances at each end; the rooms in the second floor are
used as work-rooms; the male and female prisoners occupy distinct portions of the prison; the prisoners
not sentenced to the tread-mill are employed in profitable labour, and a portion of their earnings is paid
to them on their discharge; they are visited by a Protestant and a R. C. chaplain, a physician, surgeon,
and apothecary.

The accommodation must not have been above criticism, however. In 1838, further work was done,
‘rendering the Richmond Bridewell safe for prisoners’, while in 1841 there was further building work
at the site at a cost of over £6,000.

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

9

Above: Daniel O’Connell.
Right: “Richmond Bridewell,
late prison of O’Connell and
the Repeal Martyrs”, from
The Freeman’s Journal.
(Courtesy of the National Library
of Ireland)

Daniel O’Connell’s stay in the Richmond Bridewell
A very far cry from the lot of the ordinary inmate in the prison was the experience there of the
nationalist leader Daniel O’Connell, who was held in the Bridewell for three months in 1844. He
was arrested after his proposed ‘Monster Meeting’ at Clontarf in favour of the repeal of the Act of
Union or Irish self-government was declared illegal. On the night of Saturday, October 7, 1843, a
proclamation was issued from Dublin Castle banning the meeting, written by the Prime Minister of
Britain and Ireland, Sir Robert Peel. It called the proposed meeting for the restoration of the Irish
Parliament, abolished in 1801, “an attempt to overthrow the constitution of the British Empire as by
law established”.
O’Connell was charged with, ‘conspiracy to raise and create discontent and disaffection among the
Queen’s subjects’, and a number of other counts to the effect that he had desired to dissolve the

10

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

Union between Britain and Ireland and
to establish an alternative judiciary in
Ireland. He was tried in early 1844 before
a jury that he alleged was ‘packed’ with
Protestants and unionists. O’Connell
maintained he had merely pursued
legitimate political goals by open and
legal means but was nevertheless found
guilty of conspiracy and in March of
that year he was sentenced to twelve
months imprisonment. An angry mob of
O’Connellite supporters barracked the
carriage that took their leader from the
Four Courts to the Richmond Bridewell.
O’Connell’s stay there was, however,
much more comfortable than that of
most ordinary prisoners. He and his
supporters who had been imprisoned
(including his son John and right-handman ‘Honest’ Tom Steele) were housed
in rooms in the Governor’s suite,
which was described as, ‘a pleasant
country house, situated in the middle
of extensive grounds, bright with fair
women and the gambols of children,
with abundant means either for study or
amusement’.
The reason for their comfortable
accommodation was that the prison was
under the control of Dublin Corporation,
a body dominated by O’Connell’s
supporters, who just three years earlier
had elected him Lord Mayor of the city.
They instructed that special care and
attention be given to, ‘our illustrious
countryman’. O’Connell was free to

Daniel O’Connell addressing crowds from the balcony of his home in
Merrion Square following his release from The Richmond Bridewell, 6
September 1844. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

11

Above: view of Richmond Bridewell and, below, the Dining Room, as drawn by Henry O’Neill R.H.A. 1844.
(Courtesy of the Christian Brothers, Edmund Rice House)

12

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

Above: the Liberator’s bedroom and, below, John O’Connell’s bedroom, Richmond Bridewell, as drawn by Henry O’Neill
R.H.A. 1844. Both rooms display an opulence not usually accorded an inmate of the prison.
(Courtesy of the Christian Brothers, Edmund Rice House)

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

13

Section of the Register from the Richmond Bridewell 1845-1849.

14

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

(Courtesy of the National Archives)

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

15

receive guests and his dinner table was never set for less than 30 people. He even became infatuated
with one visitor, the 23 year old Rose McDowell (daughter of a political ally), whom the 68 year old
O’Connell asked to marry him (she refused).
In September 1844, O’Connell’s conviction was struck down in the House of Lords due to the jury
having been improperly selected. He was freed on September 5, 1844, whereupon hundreds of his
jubilant supporters descended on the Richmond Bridewell in celebration. O’Connell, ever the master
of political street theatre, returned to the prison from his home in Merrion Square that evening for
a formal procession home, where his release could be openly celebrated by thousands of Repealers.

The Famine
Not long after O’Connell’s dramatic release from the Richmond Bridewell, Ireland was afflicted by
perhaps the greatest human catastrophe in its history, the Great Famine which killed some one million
people between 1845 and 1848, mostly in the rural west and south of the country.
In Dublin, where the poor generally lived on bread rather than potatoes, the results of the Famine
were more indirect. While the population of Ireland fell by as much as 1.5 million in the Famine years,
the population of Dublin actually increased from 232,726 in 1841 to 258,361 in 1851, as refugees from
the hungry provinces descended on the capital.
Workhouses and prisons such
as the Richmond Bridewell
became
crammed
with
desperate, starving people –
in the former seeking the only
form of state aid available and
in the latter for petty crimes
such as theft. Indeed, there
were several organised attacks
on bread shops by ‘country
people’ fleeing the Famine.
Whereas in 1845 there were
only 627 people in custody in
all of Ireland, in 1853 there
were over 4,000.

Famine in Ireland 1845-48. The Richmond Bridewell was filled to twice its capacity
during the Famine. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

16

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

It was recorded that the
Liberties district, just north of
the Richmond Bridewell, was
‘crowded with fever stricken

strangers from different parts of the country, especially Mayo, Galway and other western counties’.
Mainly as a result of the spread of contagious diseases caused by the Famine refugees, burials rose by
some 20% in Dublin during the Famine and there were an estimated 20,000 excess deaths in the Irish
capital between 1841 and 1851. The prison records show a total of 154 deaths occurring in the prison
from 1845 – 1849.
The Richmond Bridewell in 1858 was reported to have housed 60 men and 41 women. They were
generally low risk prisoners, described in the language of the time as, ‘debtors, criminals, drunkards
and lunatics’.
The type of inmate typically imprisoned in the Richmond Bridewell is illustrated by a court report from
The Irish Times of May 5, 1859. A young man, named James Daly, who had two previous convictions
for larceny, was convicted of stealing a brass bar from a tea shop in South Great George’s Street. His
father, described in the press report as ‘a respectable hard working tradesman’, pleaded for ‘merciful
treatment’. The unimpressed judge, however, sentenced James Daly to three months imprisonment in
the Richmond Bridewell and recommended he be sent to a reformatory when he got out.
Discipline inside the Richmond Bridewell was strict. In 1859 it was noted that eleven prisoners were
sentenced to solitary confinement and two to whipping. The other prisoners had to do work such
as picking oakum (a form of tarred fibre used in shipbuilding) or, for special punishment, walking on
treadmills.

The Fenian Era
O’Connell was not the last Irish nationalist leader to be held in the Richmond Bridewell. Other prominent
nationalists imprisoned there included leaders such as William Smith O’Brien and Thomas Francis
Meagher, who were held there for their part in the abortive 1848 Young Ireland rebellion, a poorly planned
episode that occurred at the tail end of the Great Famine. Meagher unveiled the Irish tricolour of green
white and orange in March 1848 in his native Waterford – a gift from French republicans. The flag was later
adopted as the symbol of the Irish Republic after 1916. Both men were sentenced to death and imprisoned
in the Richmond Bridewell in 1849 (like O’Connell they were held in the Governor’s Residence),
but were reprieved due to a public outcry and sentenced instead to transportation to Australia.
Meagher later made his way to America where he led an Irish brigade in the American Civil War. After
the Civil War had ended, Meagher became acting Governor of Montana.
The most famous Irish nationalist activist imprisoned in the Richmond Bridewell in the post Famine
era, however, was the Fenian leader James Stephens. Stephens, who had been wounded in the illfated insurrection of 1848, founded the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) or Fenian Brotherhood in
1858, which was dedicated to the pursuit by any means necessary of an independent Irish republic. In
1865, government officials raided the IRB headquarters in Dublin, housed in the office of the Fenian
newspaper the Irish People. Most of the leaders were arrested, convicted of treason and felony, and

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

17

sentenced to penal servitude. Stephens avoided immediate
arrest but was picked up and charged with conspiracy and
high treason and was imprisoned in the Richmond Bridewell.
However, on November 5th, 1865, a distressed Daniel Ryan,
Superintendent of the Dublin Metropolitan Police, wrote to
his superiors: “I beg to state that at 5.20 o’clock this morning
a constable of E. Division stated at G. Division office that Mr.
Marquess, Governor of the Richmond Bridewell, directed
him to call and say that James Stephens, who was confined
there on a charge of high treason, had made his escape”.

James Stephens, Fenian leader.

(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Security in the Richmond Bridewell seems to have been
rather lax. Stephens had been able to open his cell and then,
by stacking two tables one on top of the other, to have simply
climbed over the boundary wall. To do this he had to open
seven locked doors, which he had done by means of what
the police described as ‘false keys’. It seemed certain to the
investigating authorities, therefore, that Stephens had some
help from prison staff in his escape and indeed he did. Daniel
Byrne and John Breslin, who were members of the prison
staff and also Fenians, had a replica key made for Stephens
and stacked the tables near the prison wall so that he could
make good his escape.

Stephens subsequently fled to France and then to America. His escape made world headlines in 1865,
including the front page of Harper’s Weekly in America. The New York Times, for its part, reported:
Our Dublin correspondent, in his letter of last night, says: “The Richmond Bridewell, from which the
Fenian chief, JAMES STEPHENS, has escaped ... is situated upon the Circular road, an avenue that
almost surrounds the City of Dublin.... It is not the best protected of the Dublin prisons, and it is remarked
that if STEPHENS had been placed in Kilmainham he could not have got off...
A reward for the apprehension of STEPHENS of £1,000 will, I understand, be offered by the Executive tonight, and also one of £300 for the apprehension of the person or persons who aided his escape, or such
information as will fasten the guilt upon them. All sorts of rumors of an absurd character are of course
afloat; one has got many to credit it, that a strange steamer has been lying off shore in the bay, awaiting
STEPHENS, which, it need hardly be said, is quite impossible. According to another rumor, STEPHENS
was met and carried off when he crossed the prison wall, by a hundred or more armed Fenian Brothers.

Stephens’ escape became a well-known story among Dubliners thereafter. Joseph O’Connor, an IRA
prisoner in what was then Griffith Barracks in 1922, recalled:

18

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

Harper’s Weekly front
cover, 7th April 1866.
Caption reads:
‘Richmond Bridewell,
Dublin, from which
head-centre
Stephens escaped.’

While a prisoner in Griffith I got my last sight of my father. He was looking through the main gate, hoping
to catch a glimpse of me. We saw each other then for the last time on earth. When I was a boy he had
pointed out to me the cell in the same building he occupied during Fenian times, and then he would show
me where he was posted when James Stephens, the Fenian Leader, escaped from the same prison.

Stephens was not, however, the only Fenian to be held in the Richmond Bridewell. After the failed
uprising which the organisation attempted in 1867, several were imprisoned at the Richmond
Bridewell. They found conditions there, which were made stricter after Stephens’ embarrassing
escape, harsh, and certainly a far cry from those experienced by Daniel O’Connell. According to one
account, “Lumped together with other inmates, the Fenian prisoners found that they were obliged to
sleep on hard plank beds rather than hammocks and they were introduced to mindless, repetitive tasks
such as oakum picking and walking on treadmills”. Another distinguished inmate in the Richmond
Bridewell was the Lord Mayor of Dublin, Timothy Daniel Sullivan, who was imprisoned there for two
months for publishing The Nation, an Irish nationalist newspaper, in 1887.

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

19

The Richmond Bridewell in 1870
In 1877, when the British Government established a General Prisons Board in Ireland to centralise
the organisation of all gaols and prisons, the convict population in all of Ireland was 4,000 men and
women, divided amongst 38 county prisons, 96 bridewells like Richmond, and four convict prisons.
What was daily life like in the Richmond Bridewell? A look at an inspector’s report of 1870 gives us
some insights.
A statutory inspection on December 19, 1870 found that Richmond housed 245 adult male prisoners (by
this time female prisoners were not housed in Richmond, being all accommodated in Grangegorman)
along with twelve juveniles. The total was an increase on the previous year, but remained within
the norm for Richmond’s convict population in the 1860s, which hovered between 200 and 250
throughout the decade. Of those in Richmond in late 1870, 23 were awaiting trial and eleven were
military prisoners, having been tried by courts martial. Of the remainder, 48 were there for some form
of larceny or theft, 44 for ‘other misdemeanours’, eight in default of bail, seventeen for non-payment
of fines, one under the Poor Law Act and five were ‘drunkards’.
A handful of inmates had committed serious crimes such as manslaughter or illegal stockpiling of
weapons (presumably Fenian activists) but the great majority were there for either theft, common
assault or drunkenness. Many of these were serving short sentences. In 1870, a total of 3,296 prisoners
were committed to Richmond, but only 245 were there on the day of inspection, meaning that most
served only a short period inside the gaol. In 1870 the highest number in Richmond on any given
day was 341 on July 26. Only 45 prisoners out of 245 present on the day of inspection were serving
sentences of a year or over.
Most prisoners were housed in cells with two other inmates. The heating system was described as
‘imperfect’ but there was, apparently ‘ample water’, and inmates could have a bath twice a month.
Generally, however, they washed in sheds in the yard. Gas heated the cells until 7:30 pm in winter
time. They were paraded for breakfast at 8.00 am and locked back in their cells at 6.00 pm. In between
they performed hard labour and other tasks involved in the running of the prison such as cooking and
cleaning.
The inspectors reported that security had improved since Stephens’s escape five years earlier and that
‘discipline is very efficiently maintained’. Photographs were taken of some inmates, especially repeat
offenders, ‘professional thieves and the criminal class’.
Infractions on the part of prisoners were still punished by time on the treadmill, solitary confinement
and punitive labour. Prisoners’ food was also stopped on occasion, but whipping, noted in the 1860
report, appears to have stopped by this date. Some 29 prisoners attended school regularly.

20

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

After 1868, the Richmond Bridewell became a site of execution. In 1868, the law was changed so
that executions were no longer performed in public. The first private execution in Dublin, after the
passing of the 1868 Act, was of one Andrew Carr on July 28, 1870 in the Richmond Bridewell. He was
an army pensioner who voluntarily confessed to cutting the throat of his girlfriend during a drunken
argument. Present at his execution were thirteen newspaper reporters, three Catholic priests and
three ‘medical gentlemen’. The governor was uneasy about the hangman (like Carr an ex-soldier)
who was inexperienced at his grim new job. He decided on a drop of fourteen feet for the prisoner
despite advice from the surgeon that eight feet would suffice. At the drop, Andrew Carr’s head was
ripped from his body. According to The Irish Times, “the head sprang off from the body against the
wall, blood spouted and spattered all around and the trunk fell into a pool of it on the ground. The
body quivered slightly for about three minutes after the execution”.
A December 1870 report concluded: “the lamentable occurrence at the execution of Carr was caused
by the want in elasticity of the rope”.

The execution of Joseph Poole
Executions were relatively rare in late 19th century Dublin, but the
Richmond Bridewell did witness one more, very high profile hanging. In
late 1883, it was the scene of the execution of Joseph Poole, a member
of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. He was executed at a time when
Fenian political violence was causing both outrage and fear among the
political establishment in Ireland. The Invincibles, a militant Fenian
grouping, assassinated the two leading members of the British
administration in Ireland, the Chief Secretary for Ireland, Frederick
Cavendish and the Under Secretary for Ireland, Thomas Henry Burke, in
the Phoenix Park on May 6, 1882. Five Invincibles were later hanged for
this crime.
Joseph Poole.

Poole was, a rank and file member of the Fenians in Dublin. He was
(Courtesy of Robert Delaney)
sworn into the IRB in 1873, aged just 18 and worked for most of his life as
a tailor. By 1882 he was also armourer (or quartermaster) for a Fenian circle or cell. He was arrested
in July 1882 and charged with the killing of John Kenny, a Fenian and an alleged police informer, who
was suspected of giving away the Invincibles. It was alleged that Poole was a member of a Fenian
group known as the ‘Vigilance Committee’, which was tasked with eliminating informers, though he
denied this. Poole admitted drinking with Kenny on the night of his death but denied any part in his
murder. However, a witness at Poole’s trial (a roommate of his) later alleged that Poole returned to his
lodgings that night saying, ‘Kenny will tell no more’. He was released for lack of evidence.

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

21

Poole was rearrested in December 1882 and charged again with Kenny’s murder.  It was believed
that the Dublin Metropolitan Police (DMP) sought the death penalty as they suspected that Poole
had a hand in shooting dead one of their constables earlier that year. The shooting of this policeman
had occurred as a result of a clash between two rival Fenian factions in 1882 – one backers of the
IRB’s Supreme Council, the other, Poole’s faction, Stephenites (followers of the exiled leader James
Stephens). The Council faction were trying to kill Poole in a dispute over who controlled weapons
caches in Dublin. Shots were exchanged in the streets after a dispute over which faction would
control a cache of weapons. The only casualty, however, was a DMP policeman named Cox, who was
shot inadvertently when he tried to intervene. A Fenian named Dowling was later charged with the
shooting and served ten years in prison.
When Poole stood trial for the killing of John Kenny, the Crown produced as a witness Poole’s
own brother-in-law, William Lamie, a former Fenian, who testified to the factional divisions within
the Dublin Fenian movement and on Poole’s role in the ‘Vigilance Committee’. However, the case
collapsed with the jury being unable to reach a verdict. A second trial was quickly arranged and the
jury was ‘packed’ with government supporters in order to ensure a conviction and despite no new
evidence being presented, he was duly sentenced to death on November 20th, 1883. His father was
reported to have wept at the verdict and shouted “Joe, Joe”, to which Poole replied, “Keep up father,
keep up, I am ready to die”.
Upon hearing his sentence of death, Poole told the court: “I believe it is on account of being
an enemy, humble as I am, of the Government under which I have the misfortune to live, that I have
been persecuted in the manner I have been. Still I am not afraid to die, or ashamed of what has
brought me to the scaffold. It is not for murder, it is for being a member of the Irish Republican
Brotherhood that has brought me to the scaffold, and I am prepared to die for it”. He called from the
dock for “Three Cheers for the Irish Republic and to Hell with English tyranny!”
Poole was hanged in the Richmond Bridewell on December 18th, 1883. The executioner was a man
named William Jones from Wales. Poole was attended by a priest named Father Donnegan and was
reported to have shown “the utmost fortitude” on the scaffold, “never for a moment ceasing to utter
the response to the prayers” of the priest. He died instantly on being hung, the drop from the scaffold
breaking his neck. When Poole was hung a black flag was raised over the walls of the prison. The
watching crowd, according to the press, gave ‘a wailing cry’. Poole’s body was buried in an unmarked
quicklime grave within the prison.
Poole’s case became a notorious example of injustice in Ireland in the 1880s, as it was widely believed that
he was innocent of the crime for which he was convicted and that the verdict had been achieved by
‘packing’ the jury. The Irish Parliamentary Party, at that time agitating for Home Rule, brought up Poole’s
innocence in the House of Commons. However, public opinion was really roused on the matter when
allegations that Poole’s conviction had been secured by perjury came to light. Frank Grundy, a Fenian

22

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

and a friend of Poole, on completion of
a two year prison sentence in August
1884, made a deposition claiming
that he had been twice approached by
the authorities whilst incarcerated, and
offered freedom if he falsely implicated
Poole in the killing of John Kenny.
Grundy said that he had refused. Nor
was this the only allegation of attempts
by Dublin Castle to use perjury to
secure Poole’s conviction. In his speech
from the dock, Joseph Poole himself
had mentioned Lizzy Kearns, Grundy’s
sweetheart, who had been approached
by DMP Superintendent John Mallon
and offered her boyfriend’s freedom
if she swore falsely, but she too had
refused.

A plaque erected to Poole’s memory in Griffith Barracks in 1968.

Poole, the second and the last man to be hanged in the Richmond Bridewell, therefore became a
potent symbol of misgovernment in 19th century Ireland.
During work on the site in the 1890s, as part of its conversion into Wellington Barracks, Joseph Poole’s
body was discovered in a casket marked ‘J.P.’. His father had died shortly beforehand, but Poole’s
step-mother and sisters petitioned Dublin Castle to be allowed to reclaim the body and give it a proper
burial. On the advice of John Mallon of the DMP, their request was turned down. Poole’s body was
instead reburied in another anonymous site within the Barracks.
The Poole family maintained their republican tradition. Four of his brothers served in the Irish Citizen
Army during the Easter Rising of 1916. In 1958, three of Poole’s younger brothers, by that time quite
elderly, approached the Irish Army garrison at what was by then Griffith Barracks in order to try to
exhume Poole’s remains and give him, belatedly, a decent burial. The soldiers in Griffith could not
give them permission to do so, but they returned some weeks later with an exhumation order from
the Department of Defence. However, despite a day of digging behind the barracks’ gymnasium, they
sadly found only an animal bone.
A plaque was erected to his memory in Griffith Barracks in 1968 by the National Graves Association.
In 2007, following correspondence between the Poole family and Diarmuid Hegarty, President of
Griffith College, the plaque, which had been kept in storage, was re-erected.

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

23

From prison to barracks
In 1877, the Richmond Bridewell was commandeered by the War Office under the Military Prisons
Act of that year, as a site for a future barracks, but it was not occupied by troops until the 1890s. The
initial cost of the conversion work was £40,000 and another £25,000 was ploughed into erecting an
officers’ mess and living quarters.
The City of Dublin, in 1892, sued the War Department for compensation, claiming that the tax-payers
of the city had put over £96,000 into the Bridewell since its foundation in 1813. The War Office replied
that under the 1877 General Prisons Act, as the site had been used as a prison while War Office
property up to 1887, the Corporation was not entitled to any compensation.
The Corporation had a minor success, however, in claiming that portions of the site belonged to them
and the War Office eventually agreed to pay them an annual rent of £28. Additionally, £137 had to be
paid to the Treasury and £300 to the Grand Canal Company for access to the canal at the rear of the
complex. Further rents had to be paid to two private citizens, I.S. Winter and Jack Doyle, who owned
portions of the site and were respectively paid £83 and £14 per annum.
In 1892, after extensive re-building work, the Richmond Bridewell, now renamed Wellington
Barracks after the Duke of Wellington, was occupied by troops of the Royal Munster Fusiliers, though
re-building was not completed until 11 November 1893. It would be garrisoned by British troops up
to 1922.

24

THE RICHMOND BRIDEWELL 1813-1892

Chapter 2
Wellington Barracks 1892-1922
Wellington Barracks with soldier on guard duty, c.1900.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

25

O

n December 12, 1891, at 8 o’clock in the morning the 1st Battalion, Royal Munster Fusiliers
under the command of Colonel Johnston disembarked at Kingstown (now Dun Laoghaire)
from HMS Assistance and marched to their new quarters at Wellington Barracks, on the site of
the old Richmond Bridewell. They were the first troops to be housed there, beginning almost a century
of military use.
When the Munsters marched in, building work was still underway, so the soldiers had to share the site
with construction workers, who did not finish their work until 11 November 1893.
The Munsters were relieved in late 1892 by the 2nd Battalion of the Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry.
After the Cornwall Light Infantry, Wellington was occupied by battalions from the Sussex Regiment,
and the North Staffords before the Munsters and Cornwalls were rotated through again. From 1900
it was garrisoned by the King’s Liverpool Regiment, The East Lancashire Regiment, a battalion of the
Dublin Fusiliers in 1910, the Royal Fusiliers in 1912, the East Surrey Regiment in 1914 and the Royal
Irish Fusiliers in 1917.

Wellington Barracks, plan/elevations c. 1900. (Courtesy of Military Archives, Department of Defence)

26

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

Inside Wellington Barracks, with soldiers on horseback c.1900. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Wellington was designed for occupation by a battalion of about 600 men. Most troops lived in single
soldiers’ quarters, based in the old cell blocks. However a considerable number lived with their families
in the married quarters. The 1911 census returns show 41 families, or around 200 people, living in the
married quarters. One such family, for instance, were the McMurrays. The head of the household was
Robert, a 38 year old soldier who had been born in Belfast. His English-born wife Elizabeth, ten years
his junior, had borne him six children, of whom all but the youngest two, aged 2 and 4 respectively,
could read and write. All had been born in England and belonged to the Church of England.
Daily life in the barracks was a routine of guard duty, inspections and parades, punctuated by war
simulations or manoeuvres and sport. In 1893 for example, it was reported:
‘An Invading force under the command of Major Fisher, 10th Hussars, Marlborough Barracks (drill order
with full dress headdress) was landed near Wicklow on 16th December. It will march north on Dublin
under Lt. Col. Courtney, 1st Royal Sussex Regiment, Wellington Barracks (drill order) will take up a
line of outposts on the probable line of the invaders’ advance the outposts to be in position by 9:15 a.m.’

Two years later, units from Wellington also took part in the Royal Irish Military Tournament in
Ballsbridge, which included displays such as Trooping the Colour, Musical Rides and a March Past,
as well as competitions such as, tent pegging, lemon cutting, wrestling on horseback, boxing and tug
of war, among others. Troops were also kept busy with more conventional team sports. In 1899, the
soccer team of the North Staffords, quartered in Wellington, defeated the Scottish Borderers 4-1 in the
Irish Army Cup. Officers, however, were free to pursue more genteel activities. Two captains, Dease
and Prouse, were reported to have acted in a ‘screaming farce’ entitled A night on the Sugar Loaf, at
the Rotunda Military Fete.

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

27

British Army Parade in Dublin. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Troops from the barracks were also involved in ceremonial duties such as displays for the coronation
of British monarchs and parading for Royal visits to Dublin; by Edward VII in 1903 and 1904, and by
George V in 1911.

The Great War
However, the relatively sedate life of the troops garrisoned at Wellington was shattered by the
outbreak of the First World War in August 1914. The day after Britain’s declaration of war, on August
5 1914, The Irish Times reported that, “The Commanding Officer of the 1st battalion, City of Dublin
Cadets requests all cadets and ex-cadets of the force to parade in Wellington Barracks at 8 o’clock this
evening with a view of enrolling for garrison duty or active service if necessary.”
Within weeks, the regiments of the regular British Army had been deployed to the front in France
and Belgium. The 1st Battalion of the East Surrey regiment, which had been stationed in Wellington,
joined the 14th Brigade of the 5th Division of the British Expeditionary Force. The East Surreys landed

28

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

Recruiting posters for the First
World War: ‘Be one of the 300,000’ –
Wellington Barracks was a recruiting
depot during the War.
‘Your First duty is to play your part in
ending the war’, John Redmond, 1915.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

at Le Havre and during the first few months of the war gained honours at Mons, Le Cateau, on the
Marne and on the Aisne. By the end of the year, the British regulars had suffered horrific losses, such
that in some units of 1,000 men only 30 remained neither killed nor wounded by the close of the year.
This amounted to a casualty rate of over 90% among the original British Expeditionary Force that had
been sent to France.
From the outset Lord Kitchener, the Minister for War in the British Cabinet, recognised that it would
be a long war and called for a million volunteers. The response across the UK was immediate and
men thronged the recruiting offices and barracks throughout Britain. Dublin was in a more complex
situation than most cities in the United Kingdom, however. Ireland was in the midst of a deepening
political crisis over the introduction of Home Rule. On July 26, just over a week before Britain’s entry
into the war, the Irish Volunteers had illegally landed rifles at Howth and in subsequent disturbances
in Dublin city, British troops had shot dead three people and injured 37. Nevertheless, the troops such
as the East Surreys who departed Dublin in August 1914 generally got a warm send-off. The Irish
Times reported, “The scenes in Dublin during the embarkation cannot fail to have been cheering and
encouraging to the gallant soldiers... From the early hours of the morning large crowds assembled on
the quays to cheer the troops on their way and to wish them God-speed on their adventure. The main
thoroughfares through which the troops passed were lined with spectators and on all sides indications
were given of popular sympathy and goodwill.”

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

29

Aided by the call of Irish Parliamentary Party Leader, John Redmond, for Irish nationalists to enlist in
the military to fight for small nations and for Irish Home Rule, over 21,000 Dubliners joined up in the
first two years of the war and 25,644 served in total from 1914-1918. Intensive recruitment efforts in
Ireland continued throughout the war and while enlistment figures lagged somewhat behind Britain
itself, some 130,000 men volunteered for military service.
Wellington Barracks was used a recruiting centre and training depot for troops being sent to France.
However, by 1916 it was sparsely occupied by a garrison of about 100 men. Frank Laird, an Irishman
serving in the British Army, described the barracks’ population as, “about a hundred old crocks, who
formed the nucleus of a garrison battalion”.

The Easter Rising
Unknown to the barracks’ garrison, just down the South Circular Road the 3rd Battalion of the Irish
Volunteers Dublin Brigade was preparing for insurrection in April of that year. They assembled, on
Easter Sunday, at nearby Emerald Square and proceeded to occupy South Dublin Union, now St
James’s Hospital, and other posts in the vicinity as part of the Easter Rising.
Two young Volunteers were sent to make sure that troops inside Wellington were not being mobilised
against them. One of the Volunteers’ scouts, Robert Holland, turned up at one of the Volunteers’ posts
at Marrowbone Lane, having forgotten to check the barracks. He recalled:
[Volunteer officer Con] Colbert then took all my equipment from me and handed me a .38 nickel-plated
revolver with about 20 rounds of ammunition. He says “What about your job on the barracks?” I told
him it would take me two minutes from the South Circular Road entrance of Wellington Barracks to
the Cork Street entrance of Ardee Street Brewery ... [He] said to go to the gate of Wellington Barracks
and to watch the military and if I saw anything suspicious such as troops forming up on the Square or
the filling up of cars with troops, and if anything like this occurred previous to 11.15 I was immediately
to return to Emerald Square. If nothing occurred I was to stay there until two minutes to twelve and
then proceed to Ardee Street Brewery. I proceeded to Wellington Barracks as directed and stayed there.
Nothing abnormal occurred and I left two minutes to twelve and went to Ardee Street Brewery.

The other was Thomas Young, who was ordered to scout the area of the South Circular Road for troop
movements:
I was further ordered to take my party to a position where I could command a view of the gates of
Wellington Barracks, so that I could prevent any troops in numbers leaving the Barracks. I was to
maintain this position until twelve o’clock noon, when I could withdraw. I took up a position at the
junction of Wellington St. and Wolsely Street where I had a fair view of the main gate of Wellington
Barracks. No British military came out from the Barracks. I withdrew at twelve o’clock and returned to
Emerald Square, but found no Volunteers there. I proceeded down Marrowbone Lane.

30

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

Easter Rising: the GPO in ruins. Inset: Con Colbert, the Volunteer officer, who ordered
Wellington to be scouted on the outbreak of the Rising. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

In fact the troops in Wellington, even had they known that rebellion was breaking
out, were in no position to do anything about it. Inside the barracks, the meagre
garrison had initially just six rifles between them, their arms having for some
reason been transferred elsewhere some nights before.
Frank Laird, an officer in the Dublin Fusiliers, was stationed in the Royal Barracks
(subsequently Collins Barracks and now the National Museum) on the north side of the River Liffey
but had been visiting family in Rathmines when the fighting broke out. Cycling back towards the
Royal Barracks, he skirted around fighting taking place at the bridge over the Grand Canal near
Portobello Barracks and was directed for his own safety by a British officer into Wellington. There
he found the under strength and poorly armed garrison and “another hundred waifs and strays like
myself, who had blown in”.
One soldier suggested retiring to the upper floors of the barracks so that the rebels might leave them
alone. Another complained that he had brought his wife and family to Dublin to escape German air
raids, only to now find them in the middle of a rebellion. Fortunately for them, the complex was not
attacked during the week’s fighting and more arms were sent to Wellington in the following days.
A patrol dispatched from the barracks up towards Wexford Street was fired on, losing one dead and
one wounded. Frank Laird recalled, “A ration party of a sergeant and three men... walked into a trap

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

31

down some side street. Fire was opened on them suddenly from the houses and one man was shot
through the head. Another man ran straight ahead and disappeared”. He later, sheepishly, returned to
the barracks in civilian clothes.
On the other side, a Volunteer named Seamus Kavanagh stationed in Jacob’s biscuit factory heard that
British troops were advancing along Camden Street, as if to launch an attack on Jacob’s:
When I had reported this information to the Countess Markievicz, Tom Donoghue and a Citizen Army
man whose name I cannot remember, and myself were ordered to proceed along Cuffe Street. Just as
we reached Fanning’s, the chandlers, we saw the head of the British column at the Cuffe St. end of
Wexford St. We lay down, and opened fire on them, wounding about three of them, whom I saw falling.
They seemed to scatter in all directions. They were 6 British “Tommies” being marched along Wexford
St. We fell back on the Green then. We expected them to come down Montague St. and attack us at
Harcourt St., but we got word that they had returned to Wellington Barracks (now Griffith Barracks).
They probably had been out scouting.

Another British officer in the barracks later accidentally shot himself in the leg. Wellington also came
under sniper fire. According to Laird, “An industrious sniper took his station each evening about seven
o’clock at the corner house up the road and did his best to pick off the sentry at the gate. A few barrels
filled with earth frustrated this project but our friend persisted night after night for an hour or two”.
They raided the houses in the area but could not find the sniper.
According to Volunteer accounts, long range machine gun fire from the barracks was directed at the
insurgent position at Jacob’s biscuit factory, while according to Laird, at least one civilian, an unlucky
rector of a nearby church who had climbed the steeple to watch the battle, was shot in the arm by a
lieutenant. Some troops from Wellington manned a checkpoint at the Rialto Bridge over the Canal,
where they arrested a number of Volunteers trying to join the rebel garrison at South Dublin Union.
It was not until the following Sunday, when the insurgents in South Dublin Union and Jacob’s Factory
had surrendered, that the garrison of Wellington could emerge safely from behind the walls of the
barracks. Damage in the immediate area had been slight, but elsewhere much of central Dublin lay in
ruins and up to 500 people, around half of them civilians, lay dead.

Losing rifles to the Volunteers 1917-18
Subsequently, as peaceful conditions returned to Dublin, the Barracks resumed its normal role.
However, by mid-1917, with the prisoners from the Rising already released, conflict was again in the
air. The Irish Volunteers, soon to be called the Irish Republican Army or IRA, prepared for guerrilla
warfare against British troops in the Irish capital by rearming, often at the expense of the armoury in
Wellington Barracks. Even before the 1916 Rising, a young 3rd Battalion Volunteer named Joe Brophy,
who was also employed as a telegraph messenger, stole and bought rifles off soldiers in Wellington.

32

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

The burnt out shell of the Linen Hall Barracks. Wellington was not directly attacked but was harassed by sniper fire
during the Rising. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

On one occasion he even stole a pair of binoculars from a Major O’Hara at the barracks.
An IRA quartermaster named Kit Farrell, with the aid of a sympathetic Irish serviceman called Edward
Handley, bought and smuggled over 100 rifles and thousands of rounds of ammunition out of the
barracks – ferrying the weapons over the canal at the rear of the complex by night in small batches in
late 1917 and early 1918.
Edward Handley was a Dublin Fusilier on leave from France, where he had been wounded, and
stationed with the Labour Corps at Wellington Barracks, where he served as a storeman with access
to the armoury. He got in touch with Farrell through a mutual friend in the Irish Citizen Army. Handley
recalled:
I was later transferred to a newly formed Labour Corps at Wellington Barracks where I was again
able to pass out rifles at the back gate near Harold’s Cross Bridge. A military policeman who had been
transferred from Portobello with me knew what I was doing and was sympathetic. I always chose the
time he was on duty at the back gate to pass out the rifles. In Wellington Barracks there were huts where
men used to go for lectures on wet days. They often left their rifles outside the huts and it was an easy
matter to take a few. As I was a storeman I did not attract undue attention when walking around with the

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

33

rifles. The men, of course, had to pay for the lost rifles and this generally seemed to satisfy the authorities,
although there were periodical searches of traders vans here also. My military policeman friend always
gave notice of any searches that were to take place.

He later played up his patriotic motives in helping to arm the Volunteers but it was also clear that he
was well paid for his activities. According to Joseph O’Connor, an IRA officer in the 3rd Battalion:
About this time, the Quartermaster, Christie Farrell, of “A” Company, got in touch with some British
soldiers stationed in Wellington Barracks, what is now known as Griffith Barracks. They were willing
to hand over rifles and ammunition on the payment of a very small sum per rifle and per packet of
ammunition, each packet containing fifty rounds; the price in either case never exceeded £1.
This was a very valuable source of supply to us and we succeeded in getting up to 100 rifles and probably
1,000 rounds of ammunition before the discovery was made. The procedure adopted was, and this in the
depth of winter, that our men should swim the canal from Parnell Road to the iron railings surrounding
Wellington Barracks.

Christie ‘Kit’ Farrell, the quartermaster, left the most detailed account of the operation:
The Grand Canal forms the rear boundary of the barracks which is situated between the bridges Harold’s Cross and Sally’s Bridge. Inside barrack railings, at a point almost opposite to Greenmount
Lane (on the opposite side of the canal) is a small red-bricked house known as the Schoolmaster’s
House. This house offered cover to both myself and the contact on the inside. It was decided that I would
swim across the canal at this point. The rifles were to be passed out under the bottom bar of the railings.
Time - 1 o’clock - striking by clock in the barrack tower. Signal – three low whistles.
Next morning at 00.50 hours, seven men arrived at Greenmount Lane. Each man knew his job; everything
in the vicinity was normal. Gas lamps bordering the road were dimmed by men detailed for that job. I
swam across the canal. From my position on the canal bank I could see the light shining from the
Guardroom and hear the measured tread of the sentry across the barrack square. As the barrack clock
struck the hour, I gave the signal and received the answer and was in possession of three rifles. The
Operation was definitely on. I strapped the rifles on my back, using the slings, and swam back to the
boys. I was helped out. Very shortly the rifles were on their way to the dump at Jimmie Murray’s home.
I made about 14 crossings on different nights on this plan, out of which we obtained about 50 rifles.
It was winter and on several occasions I swam through a thin coating of ice. On one occasion I was
about half-way across when I received the danger signal. I had four rifles strapped on my back and had
to remain longer than usual in the water. I was seized with cramp and was taken from the water by
Peadar O’Meara. The cause of the danger signal was a couple of soldiers who, accompanied by their lady
friends, arrived at the spot where I had intended to land. They would select that spot to say goodnight.
They were soon got rid of by Jimmie Murray who proceeded to mend an imaginary puncture in the wheel
of his cycle. We now received our first setback. Our inside contact was suspicious of things inside and
requested us to lay off until we heard from him.

34

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

Wellington Barracks from the canal c.1900. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)
During the waiting period we decided to change our plan and work from the front of the barracks. About
a week elapsed before we received the all clear from the soldiers. I explained the change of plan to our
contact. He pointed out the fact that, though it was a quicker means of getting the rifles away, it exposed
to greater danger the men working on the outside as they would be practically in full view of the sentry
and could be seen quite easily. The risk was ours. We took it.
The main entrance to Wellington Barracks was on the South Circular Road. Inside the gate was situated
the guardroom and a sentry post. About 50 yards from this post towards Leonard’s Corner is another
gate which is more or less covered by the shadow of a block of buildings facing the road. It was through
this gate we proposed the rifles should be passed to us. Our first attempt here was so successful that we
carried on at intervals for about six weeks. In spite of the close proximity of the sentry, rifles were passed
through the bars of the gate, carried across the road and dispatched to the dump. Very shortly, and very
unfortunate for us, this regiment was transferred elsewhere. The entire operation gave us over 100 rifles
and some ammunition.

It says much about the laxity of security in the barracks at the time that not only was Handley not
caught and punished, he was subsequently transferred as storeman to military posts at the North Wall,
near Dublin Port and Kingstown (now Dun Laoghaire) where he clandestinely supplied more arms
from embarking and disembarking soldiers to his contact in the Citizen Army.
However, the incident meant that, according to a member of the Leinster Regiment: “command
decided they couldn’t trust the Irish regiments. They brought over an English regiment to replace
each Irish unit and we were put back on the boats that they came over on”.

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

35

A civilian, or IRA member, killed after the IRA raid on the Customs House in May 1921. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

During the War of Independence
In November 1918, Wellington Barracks hosted a military display for the children of the Liberties to
celebrate the end of the First World War. However, just over a month later the Sinn Fein party swept
the boards in the Irish General Election, pledging not only to renounce Irish participation in the
British military, but to break the connection completely between Britain and Ireland. They declared an
Irish Republic and their parliament, the Dáil, met in Dublin for the first time in January 1919.
British efforts to suppress this republic and the parallel attempts of the IRA to hamstring the British
administration led gradually to a situation of guerrilla warfare which we now call the Irish War of
Independence. In Dublin until late 1920, this mainly consisted of assassinations of selected British
Army and Dublin Metropolitan Police intelligence operatives by a select IRA unit named the Squad
under Michael Collins – most famously on Bloody Sunday in November 1920, when they killed
fourteen British soldiers and policemen in one night. However, from late 1920, the Volunteer or IRA
Battalions in the city were also instructed to form Active Service Units or ASUs and to attack British
troops in the streets.
From early 1921 to July of that year, the garrison at Wellington was harassed by small scale guerrilla
attacks by the ASU of the Dublin IRA 3rd Battalion while on their patrols. Typically the IRA men used
revolvers and grenades, which were easy to conceal and could be used in cramped urban conditions.
During this time, Wellington was garrisoned by the 1st Battalion of the Prince of Wales’ Volunteers
and then by a battalion of the South Lancashire regiment.
IRA statements record at least three ambushes of patrols from Wellington in the immediate vicinity of
the barracks. Joseph McGuiness, one of the ASU fighters recalled:
Early in March, 1921, the section staged an ambush on a British foot patrol of about twenty-five men who
were patrolling the area from Inchicore via Rialto Bridge to Wellington Barracks, South Circular Road.

36

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

We took up a position in a field near Rialto Bridge, which was the property of Alderman Flanagan. We
lay behind a stone wall and waited until the patrol came into view and within revolver range.
Jimmy McGuinness was in charge and he ordered us to open fire on them, which we did. Evidently the
party were taken completely by surprise as they seemed to run amok and did not return the fire. I cannot
say if we caused any casualties amongst them.

Another 3rd Battalion IRA guerrilla, Padraig O’Connor, was involved in ambushing a car load of
intelligence officers (known to the IRA as the ‘Igoe Gang’) in Dolphin’s Barn on their way to Wellington
Barracks on June 30, 1921. Ten IRA men fired on the car in the square in Dolphin’s Barn. O’Connor
recalled:
One officer in the back was returning the fire all the time. Our party at the Laundry opened fire on the
car when it came abreast of their position, but the driver brought the car to Wellington Barracks. Most of
the occupants of the car were either killed or wounded. The return fire from the car wounded one civilian
who was passing at the time. Our party got away safely.

‘Good Bye Dublin’: British troops prepare to be shipped out of Dublin. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

37

There were further ambushes of troops from the barracks on the South Circular Road and Harold’s
Cross, though the attackers were not sure if any casualties had been caused.
Not far from Wellington Barracks, the Wexford Street/ Camden Street/ Aungier Street/ George’s Street
thoroughfare became known as the ‘Dardanelles’ (after the 1915 campaign in the First World War),
such was the frequency of IRA gun and grenade attacks on British troops passing to and from the city
centre to the barracks at Portobello and Wellington. The ambushes, mostly carried out by Volunteers
from the 3rd Battalion, were a danger to civilians as well as British personnel, killing at least two. On
16 March 1921, a troop lorry from Wellington barracks, carrying soldiers from the South Lancashire
Regiment, was hit by two grenades hurled from overlooking buildings on Wexford Street, killing two
of the British soldiers, Lance Corporal Jarvis and Private G. Thomas and wounding six, one of whom,
Private Whiting, died from his wounds two days later.
The War of Independence did not see any large scale military actions in Dublin, but did see some 300
people lose their lives in the city and over 4,000 arrested. The IRA could never attempt to drive the
British troops from barracks such as Wellington. Rather, their strategy was to continually harass them
and therefore to apply further pressure for a political settlement.
To an extent this succeeded. Under the terms of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, signed on 6 December 1921,
the British military were to evacuate all their posts in the southern 26 counties of Ireland and to
hand them over to the newly created Irish Free State. The period of British military use of Wellington
Barracks was coming to an end.

The building pictured in
this watercolour by Aidan
Powell was the barracks’
medical centre. It was
later used by the Revenue
Commissioners to store
tax files.

38

WELLINGTON BARRACKS 1892-1922

Chapter 3
Griffith Barracks in the Irish Civil War 1922-23
Free State officers in front of armoured cars.
Centre in the front row is Tom Ennis, who commanded
the National Army takeover of Wellington Barracks.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

39

T

he Irish Times reported on 12 April 1922: “At 8 o’clock this morning, Wellington barracks Dublin
was taken over by official IRA troops of the 2nd Eastern Division under Commandant T. [Tom]
Ennis.” The Times noted: “There was a complete absence of ceremonial and the formal handing
over of the barracks [by the British Army] attracted little attention”.
Under the terms of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, British troops were being evacuated from the territory
of the new Irish Free State – the handover process began in January 1922 with the handing over of
Beggars Bush barracks in Dublin, but did not get underway in earnest until April of that year. With
all the experience of moving posts across a far flung empire, the British troops moved to their port of
embarkation swiftly and smoothly. Michael Collins was anxious for the British to hand over barracks
and arms to his new Irish administration. Neville Macready, British Commander in Chief, was happy
to hand over Wellington, which by that time was almost empty.
However, the takeover of barracks in general and Wellington in particular was no straightforward
task, for there were by now two antagonistic Irish armed forces on the ground. One of them, loyal to
the Provisional Government set up under the Treaty, was to be called the National Army but in April
1922 when elements of its 1st Eastern Division occupied Wellington Barracks, was still calling itself
the ‘official IRA’.
The other was that element of the IRA which rejected the Treaty and its disestablishment of the Irish
Republic declared in 1919. They termed themselves simply the Irish Republican Army, or Republicans,
but were called by their pro-Treaty opponents the ‘Irregulars’ or ‘Mutineers’. The split between former
comrades in the IRA over the Treaty was deeply bitter and personal, a fact illustrated nowhere better
than in the 3rd Dublin Battalion, based in the south west of the city – the area around Wellington
Barracks. For Padraig O’Connor, for instance, a guerrilla fighter in 3rd Battalion’s active service
unit in the fight against the British, the endorsement of the Treaty by his chief, Michael Collins, was
recommendation enough. He joined the first unit of the National Army, the Dublin Guard, which
paraded in Beggars Bush Barracks, some three kilometres along the Grand Canal from Wellington, in
February 1922.
For Joseph O’Connor (no relation), on the other hand, the commander of the IRA’s 3rd Dublin Battalion,
the Treaty was a betrayal: “I felt that it was wrong to accept any settlement with England for less than
the absolute freedom of our whole country. Now that the Dáil had accepted the new position I deemed
that they had exceeded their powers, and that it was my duty to continue striving until England
withdrew all her forces and we had complete control of our affairs”. He led much of the battalion into
opposition to the Treaty and the Provisional Government in March 1922 when he endorsed a decision
of the IRA Executive to disavow the authority of the Dáil, which had passed the Treaty.
For this reason, the occupation of barracks across the country in the spring of 1922 became a race
between the two sides. At Wellington in particular, Jim Harpur, an officer in the National Army

40

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

British troops being replaced by National Army troops at Richmond Barracks in 1922. Similar scenes took place at Wellington
Barracks in April 1922. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

stationed at Beggars Bush, was told by Tom Ennis, “that Irregular elements were contemplating
having the barracks handed over to them. He instructed me to get a company together and proceed
to Wellington Barracks at 0800 hours. He undertook to inform the British O/C”. The next morning
when the Irish troops marched into the barracks, the British officer commanding duly presented arms,
showed Harpur around the barracks and marched his men out with the band playing. This, however,
was only the start of the new garrison’s problems.

The new garrison of the barracks
The barracks was the depot of the Free State’s Eastern Command under Dan Hogan, a former IRA
commander from Monaghan. It also, from September 1922, housed the Army’s Intelligence Department
under Charles Dalton, brother of Emmet, one of the National Army’s senior commanders. Both
Daltons had worked closely with Michael Collins and his ‘Squad’ in the struggle against the British.
Charles had worked as an intelligence officer and occasionally a gunman too. Several members of his
intelligence unit in Wellington Barracks – such as Joe Dolan and Frank Bolster – had been assassins
in the Squad and were to carry their efficiency at killing into the internecine conflict that followed
the Treaty.

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

41

The National Army Intelligence Department was the heir of Michael Collins’s GHQ intelligence
organisation of 1919-1921. A new intelligence organisation was established right after the truce with
the British in July 1921. Liam Tobin, who had been under Collins in GHQ intelligence was made the new
Director of Intelligence, based at Portobello Barracks. In early August 1922, this organisation evolved
into the CID (Criminal Investigation Department), based in Oriel House – a plain clothes, armed,
detective unit. In September 1922, Joe McGrath TD was put in charge of the CID (whose operational
head was Pat Moynihan) and Tobin was re-assigned to a new Army Intelligence Department. Charles
Dalton was made head Intelligence Officer in Dublin, based in Wellington Barracks. The job of the
Intelligence Department was to gather information, launch raids on republican safe houses and arrest
and interrogate suspects. They soon developed a ferocious reputation. Frank Sherwin, a fighter with
the anti-Treatyites wrote: “The Intelligence Officers were a law unto themselves. They were usually
drunk and trigger happy. Wellington Barracks was the worst.”
The regular garrison of Wellington was also tasked with general patrolling in Dublin city, to guard
against anti-Treaty IRA attacks and also to maintain civil order.

Free State or National Army soldiers parade in Wellington Barracks, in front of the guardhouse in 1922.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

42

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

Recruits for the National Army enter Wellington Barracks, 1922. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Wellington Barracks was also a training depot where new recruits were knocked into shape before
being sent to areas of guerrilla activity elsewhere in the country. Most of the NCOs who were in
charge of this training seem to have been veterans of the British Army and of the First World War. An
orderly sergeant at an inquest in November 1922, for instance, spoke with an English accent, though
he defensively maintained he was an Irishman and said he “was no stranger to machine gun fire” –
indicating he had served in the Great War.
The vast bulk of recruits, however were veterans neither of the British Army nor the IRA. Some were
as young as 16 or 17, recruited for a job, regular wages, meals and a place to live. The overwhelming
majority of them were from Dublin’s working class inner city. The military census of November 1922
recorded 644 officers and men in Wellington Barracks. One page of the census entry for Wellington
gives us an idea of the profile of the National Army soldiers there. Out of nine infantry soldiers listed,
seven were from Dublin city or county. Five were listed as 18 or 19 years old, but may in fact have been
younger, and the oldest was 23.
One of the tragedies of the period was that Wellington Barracks, with its garrison of very young and
mostly inexperienced soldiers, saw considerably more violence during the Civil War than it had in the
preceding War of Independence.

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

43

First attacks
Even in April 1922, with the official start of the civil war still months away, things were far from
peaceful. Within days of taking over the barracks, the garrison at Griffith was attacked twice by antiTreaty IRA fighters. An Army statement of April 19, 1922 stated: “men dressed in civilian clothes came
up to the gate and fired point blank at the men in the square”. Two men were wounded. The attackers,
two men carrying automatic pistols, sped away by car, only to be stopped at a roadblock and arrested.
Two days later on April 21, another, more determined attack was made. It was 11.20pm and the troops
were under curfew. Only the sentries at the gates of the barracks were still up. Suddenly fire opened
from the rooftops all around the barracks. The sentries scrambled for cover behind a steam roller and
bullets pinged off the granite bricks. For an hour, the two sides exchanged fire. Two attackers tried to
rush the front gate, throwing grenades at the soldiers inside. They replied with bombs of their own. A
total of five men were wounded in the skirmish.
The context of these attacks was the occupation, by anti-Treaty IRA forces, of the Four Courts in
defiance of the Provisional Government. Attacks were also made in these days on government
buildings, Beggars Bush Barracks and the Bank of Ireland headquarters on College Green. Although

Artillery outside the Four Courts. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

44

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

Civil War in Dublin – troops at Nelson’s Pillar. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Rory O’Connor, IRA commander in the Four Courts, denied responsibility for the shootings, this
seems unconvincing.
While in the following months, Michael Collins, head of the Provisional Government, made strenuous
efforts to re-unite the republican movement, it was clear that at some point that the government would
have to assert its authority or the Free State would collapse, bringing with it the possibility of British
re-occupation.

Civil War
On June 28, 1922, the undeclared civil war became official when Free State troops opened fire with
artillery on the anti-Treaty forces in the Four Courts. The fighting in Dublin was over within a week,
with pro-Treaty troops securing the capital. Within a month, the original garrison of Wellington
was sent to different parts of the country to break up anti-Treaty resistance, principally to Counties
Wexford, Cork and Kerry. By the end of August, the main towns and cities had all been occupied by
Free State forces but a new phase of the war was about to begin, as the anti-Treaty IRA embarked on
a campaign of guerrilla warfare in the hope of bringing down the Free State.
The victory of the pro-Treaty forces in the fighting of the summer of 1922 came at a terrible cost,
taking the lives of Arthur Griffith, President of the Second Dáil (who died of a stroke) and Michael
Collins, National Army Commander in Chief, who was killed in an ambush in County Cork. Later that
year Wellington Barracks was renamed Griffith Barracks in honour of Arthur Griffith.

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

45

Soon the grim ritual of military funerals for members of the garrison killed in action became a familiar
sight in the barracks. Michael Crampton, for example, was only 17 when joined the Army, and was
a native of Church Street in the Liberties. He died in Wexford on 25 July, killed in an ambush while
escorting a train. Another Volunteer, a man named Cuddell, a driver attached to motor transport
in Wellington Barracks, was killed near Fermoy in Cork, with two other soldiers. A mine blew the
Crossley tender he was driving “to fragments” and “the right side of his face was almost blown away”.
In Dublin itself, the garrison of the barracks
found themselves policing a restive
population, without training or guidance.
Some died in accidents, the result of mixing
so many inexperienced youths with loaded
weapons. One such was Francis Denham
(18), who was mistakenly shot by another
Free State soldier while on guard duty at
Harcourt Street train station. Another boy
soldier, Sean Sullivan, a sergeant major
at only 16 years and 10 months, died in
a scuffle while trying to clear a street
outside a pub in the north inner city. His
commanding officer fired a shot over the
heads of a crowd, only for it to ricochet
back off a roof and kill young Sullivan.
All this time, menacing the raw, nervy young
men, was the threat of attack, mostly by the
IRA 3rd Dublin Battalion, former comrades
of some of the garrison. The troops in
Wellington were regularly ambushed with a
sudden volley of shots, or a grenade thrown
at a passing troop lorry. In one incident,
a lorry heading back into Wellington
barracks was ambushed at Curzon Street,
across the South Circular Road. A grenade
flew through the air, only to miss the troops
and land in Williams’ newsagents. Maureen
Carroll, a girl of only seven and another
man, were seriously injured in the ensuing

46

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

The YMCA and other buildings on fire.

(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Buildings burning at the north end of O’Connell Street, July 1922. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

fire fight. The soldiers bundled out of their lorry and chased the ambushers down the maze of red brick
streets. They caught them on Kevin Street. The troops claimed that the two, Sean McEvoy and John
Hardwood, tried to “bolt”. Both men were shot, and McEvoy killed. The barracks was also harassed
by sniper fire on a nightly basis. On one occasion this resulted in a passerby being killed. Margaret
King, an 18 year old draper’s assistant, was shot dead by an unseen sniper while walking home past
the barracks.
The activities of the republicans were, however, generally minor in scale, often involving destruction of
roads and communications rather than direct attacks on troops. On September 16, 1922, for example,
troops from Wellington Barracks found men dismantling nearby Rialto Bridge with pickaxes and
spades, who fled when fired on. This disruption of everyday life does not appear to have been popular
in Dublin. One anti-Treaty guerrilla, Frank Sherwin, remembered, “most of the people were against
us in the civil war”.

Prisoners
Combating the republican guerrillas meant finding out who they were, where their safe-houses were
located and then arresting or killing them. This was primarily the job of Charlie Dalton’s Intelligence
Department. His men, along with regular troops from the barracks, raided known republican safe
houses and arrested hundreds of suspects.

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

47

By September 1922, 140 prisoners were
held behind barbed wire in the barracks.
By November, the number was over 250. In
the Dáil, on September 13, 1922, George
Gavan Duffy questioned the Minister for
Home Affairs, Kevin O’Higgins about why
one particular prisoner “Dr. Bastable, of
Glasgow, was arrested on the 8th instant
and imprisoned in Wellington Barracks;
by whose authority, for what reason, and
on what charge Dr. Bastable has been
arrested; and whether the application of
his solicitor, Mr. John Cusack, to visit him
on professional business will be acceded
to”. O’Higgins responded simply that,
“Prisoners arrested in an area in which
hostilities are not definitely ended must
be regarded as military prisoners in the
war zone” and that he had no information
about the man in question.
Prisoners were first taken on entry to
the barracks to the guard room and then
deposited either in cells or in the barracks
gym. Joseph O’Connor, the commander of
the anti-Treaty IRA’s 3rd Dublin Battalion
was captured in late October 1922: “After
some days in the guardroom where were
Kevin O’Higgins, Minister for Home Affairs.
also Pat Sweeney, Michael Price and the
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)
four men captured at Oriel House, I was
sent to the gymnasium, which had been
wired off and made into a collecting cage”. He describes the conditions in the gym: “The conditions in
the Gym were awful, particularly in the mornings after the place had been locked up for twelve hours.
The doctors when appealed to, stated the place should house fifty men and not more”.
Wellington was a holding centre rather than a prison and the typical stay of prisoners there was
7-8 weeks. O’Connor was moved to the much larger internment camp, nicknamed ‘Tintown’ in the
Curragh just before Christmas 1922 and was held there until 1924.

48

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

Another prisoner at Wellington in September 1922 was a lawyer, Dermot Crowley, who was arrested
by intelligence officers after he had filed a writ of habeas corpus demanding the release of republican
prisoners. He wrote to his friend and former colleague, Cahir Davitt, the new Attorney General of the
Irish Free State:
From what I have since seen and heard I believe he is one of the body called ‘Intelligence Officers’ – a
body specially created by Mr. [Richard] Mulcahy since he-became Minister for Defence, and apparently
trained after the methods practised by the British Auxiliaries in this country, but with a great deal more
coarseness and savagery than the Auxiliaries were capable of. On arrival here he searched my pockets
and took my cheque book, some private letters I had, and a pocket book containing various things. I
have got back none of these.
I have since been locked up in a filthy cell and have never undressed at night – Thursday to Monday – the
two so-called blankets supplied being unclean. The dimensions of the cell are about nine feet long, seven
wide, and ten in height. The following night (Friday) another person was put in with me.
On Saturday there were five, and last night (Sunday) nine of us in this cell. We have been locked up here
day and night except for fifteen or twenty minutes exercise each day in the yard. I have scarcely eaten
anything since my arrival. The food given to the prisoners in these cells consists of the leavings of the
common soldiers in the guardroom adjoining, who never use a knife or fork themselves.

Disturbing stories soon emerged of the treatment the prisoners in Wellington received. Anti-Treaty
commander Ernie O’Malley wrote a letter to the newspapers complaining that “Commandants Dan
Coughlan and Frank Bolster” had “kicked prisoners senseless” at Wellington Barracks. On Saturday
September 30th, an urgent request was sent to nearby Mount Argus Church for a priest to see a
prisoner, Fergus Murphy. He had been wounded in the head. The priest, Fr. Kieran Farrelly, raced to
the barracks, but troops there told him: “it’s nothing, a minor scalp wound”. Unconvinced, he went
looking for Murphy among the prisoners. Standing at the barbed wire, he found him:
As he drew near, I had a sickening feeling, because I had never before seen a man after torture. His head,
from the eyes and ears upwards, was heavily bandaged. His eyes were blacked and twitching with pain.
His face on both sides of the nose was also black. His right cheek was terribly swollen. I asked him what
had happened him. He motioned to the Intelligence Department and said, “They took me down there last
night and left me as you see me”.

On October 4, T.J. O’Connell TD asked W.T. Cosgrave, now President of the Dáil, about the allegations
of mistreatment of prisoners in Wellington and Fergus Murphy in particular: ”It is a matter of common
knowledge to this Dáil that widespread complaints have been made with regard to the treatment of
prisoners”. Cosgrave responded that the medical officer at Wellington had stated that “’this man came
into the barracks suffering from old wounds. There are no prisoners in the barracks suffering from
the effects of ill-treatment. Now an investigation is taking place in this case, and disciplinary action
will be taken if any charge is proved”.

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

49

Dermot Crowley wrote to Cahir Davitt at around the same time telling of the beating of prisoners:
Some of the occupants of this cell and the adjoining one have been frequently interrogated concerning
themselves and other people and savagely assaulted. This is done by the ‘Intelligence Officers’ referred
to. I have witnessed instances of it. Once when I was being interrogated myself another officer intervened
and said: “This is a special case”.
On three separate occasions that night the cell door was opened and the prisoner dragged out and
savagely beaten because he could not or would not give information about other people. On the third
occasion an order was given outside to a number of soldiers to form a firing party and to load. I heard
these orders and the actual loading of the rifles. I heard other appalling expressions likewise. My soul
sickened at the thought that I belonged to a country where such abominations were committed and paid
for by the people.
The prisoner seemed to have been taken out into the yard out of hearing, and about half an hour passed.
Then he was brought back by a different officer who remarked: “Only for me you would have gone west
that time!” The next day in my presence the same prisoner, was subjected to another “interrogation”. A
revolver was put to his face and he was told three times that he would be taken out that night at 12.30
and shot. Two hours later he was taken to an office for further “interrogation”. I was standing at the door
of that office. I heard his moans of pain inside. He came out with his face swollen at both sides. He said
some of his teeth were broken.
An officer accompanied us back to our cell. He seemed sorry for the continued persecution of this man.
I told him of the threat to take the prisoner out that night and shoot him, and asked who was in charge
of the barrack, and why these “Intelligence Officers” were allowed to come in at all hours of the night
to practise such infamies. This officer said: “I am in charge of the barrack, and this man will not be shot
to-night”. He added: “But he was lucky in not being shot as soon as he was arrested”.

Crowley, who was not a member of the IRA, eventually went on hunger strike and was released in
October 1922.

The Dirty War
The officer quoted by Crowley who feared that prisoners were being shot out of hand by the Intelligence
Department was not worrying unnecessarily. On October 6, 1922, Charles Dalton arrested three
youths in Drumcondra who had been putting up republican posters and brought them to the barracks
for questioning. They were interrogated by officers there and then discharged. The following day
their bodies were found at the Red Cow in Clondalkin, shot in the head. Edwin Hughes and Brendan
Holohan were 17. Their friend, Joseph Rogers, was a year younger.
An inquest was held the following month and the prosecution counsel asked for a verdict of murder to
be brought against Dalton. The jury, perhaps afraid of crossing the army, declined. In fact, Dalton was
put under arrest by the CID, a police counter-insurgency unit largely made up of former IRA men, with
an equally grim record as the Army Intelligence Department, but was never charged.

50

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

There were complaints from their own side that the intelligence officers were too wedded to raids
rather than intelligence gathering. One intelligence officer, Bryan, complained that they sat around
the office in Wellington waiting for a tip-off so that they could raid, rather than analysing intelligence.
Nevertheless, the Intelligence Department could be effective. They had extensive knowledge of how
the IRA worked in Dublin and other information was, quite simply, battered out of their prisoners.
On November 4, 1922, they captured Ernie O’Malley, commander of the anti-Treaty IRA’s Eastern
Division, in a raid on his safe-house on Aylesbury Road.

The attack on Wellington Barracks, 8 November 1922
Early on the morning of November 8, 1922, the republicans made their most determined attack on
Wellington Barracks during the Civil War. The attack seems to have been part of a general ‘hit-up’
by the republicans in the city. The other military barracks around the city were also attacked in the
same week.
The barracks’ orderly clerk was attending the morning parade where the soldiers, mostly unarmed,
were listening to the order of the day read by the regimental sergeant major, when he heard machine
gun fire. The clerk at first thought it was practice firing. Then he saw spurts of dust spring up from
the ground as the bullets landed around him and flung himself to the ground. Another soldier told The
Irish Times: “I will not forget this morning for some time to come. It was a pretty tight corner to be in.
The first outburst crashed in on us just like a flash of lightning, and did most of the damage. All of us
that could crawled around for cover, it was simply death to walk in the square at that time”.
The republicans had occupied the upper stories and roofs of the houses across the canal, at the back
of the barracks. From there, they raked the parade square with rifle and machine gun fire. The sound
was deafening to the stricken soldiers. One said: “It seemed as if marbles were being rained down
from an immense height”. A total of eighteen soldiers were hit. One was killed instantly and seventeen
badly injured. As the firing started, a butchers van owned by one R. McGurk of Harolds Cross was
making a delivery to the barracks. The storm of bullets peppered the unfortunate delivery men, killing
their horse and mortally wounding the driver. According to a soldier on the scene “the whole thing
lasted about 15 minutes, the rest of the soldiers came out then and started some Lewis guns going.”
One hundred soldiers had been lined up on the square shoulder to shoulder. Given that a large number
of republicans had been involved in the attack, that they had time to set up their targets, which were
around 50 metres away, and given that they were armed with Lee Enfield rifles and Thompson and
Lewis machine guns, it says something about the poor marksmanship of the attackers that more
soldiers were not killed. The republicans made their escape across country, through the villages of
Kimmage and Crumlin, pursued by Free State troops. They were seen carrying two badly wounded
men of their own. The army later claimed the two were killed in the fire-fight.

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

51

Reprisals for the attack
Free State troops flooded the area around Wellington Barracks after the attack and ambulances
dashed to and from the hospital with the casualties. Most of the attackers had got away. But in the
aftermath of the attack, the Free State soldiers managed to exact some revenge for the attack. Inside
the barracks, some soldiers opened fire on the prisoners locked inside the gym. Joseph O’Connor
recalled:
Whilst there an attack on the barracks took place. It was a good sharp fight, but when it was ended our
turn came. We were crowded into the Gymnasium and the door locked. Some [Free] Staters got outside
the north door with sub-machine guns and fired through the wooden door, but “God directs the bullets”.
A strong inside iron bolt deflected the bullets. Only for this the casualties amongst the 250 prisoners
would have been very great, but as it was, not more than half a dozen were wounded. Seán Forde was
the prisoners’ commandant, and handled the situation well. Pat Sweeney was one of those hit. This was
the most brutal and cowardly act that I ever knew Irishmen to be guilty of.

James Spain, an anti-Treaty fighter who had been wounded in the leg while attacking the barracks,
was spotted in the neighbouring streets trying to find a friendly house. A Mrs Doleman, of 22 Donore
Road, was feeding her chickens, when a young man approached her, wounded in the leg, saying, “For
God’s sake let me in! Jesus Mary and Joseph help me, if they get me they’ll shoot me!” She let him
in, but hot on his heels was a Lancia armoured car with five soldiers in it. They pulled him out of the
house. His body was dumped in nearby Susan Street, shot five times in the chest and head.
In sweeps of the immediate area, the Free State troops picked up another twenty or so Republican
suspects. Among them was Frank Sherwin, a member of the Fianna or IRA youth wing, who was
arrested with arms along with five other youthful guerrillas who had been carrying out attacks in
Dublin, but not, apparently, the one on Wellington Barracks. Sherwin remembered: “We were marched
to Wellington Barracks, about a mile away. Some of the people on the street shouted and jeered at us.
Perhaps they knew some of the soldiers who had been shot that morning”. He was brought into the
office of the Intelligence Department into the custody of Joe Dolan, one of Charles Dalton’s men. He
has left one of the most vivid accounts of the torture of prisoners. Dolan wanted to get the name of
his commanding officer in the Fianna, Charles O’Connor. Sherwin refused to give it, fearing that if he
did O’Connor would be killed. Dolan began to beat him: “My clothes were dragged off me until I was
naked… I was lashed for about twenty minutes”.
The following day they tried again. They hit him in the head with a revolver and poked him with wire.
Dolan jabbed him with a bayonet and stuck a rifle into his mouth. He even produced a razor and
threatened to cut the prisoner’s throat. In the end they decided he wouldn’t talk and threw him back in
with the other prisoners. Sherwin recalled: “My face was swollen, my nose was broken, several teeth

52

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

Crowds gather outside the barracks after the attack. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

were missing and I had cuts and lumps on my head, with bruises all over my body. I could not stand
or move for nine days”. He was never to fully recover the use of his right arm.

The end of the Civil War
In terms of casualties inflicted, both killed and wounded, the eighteen Free State soldiers hit in the
attack on Wellington on November 8, represented the high point for the anti-Treaty guerrilla campaign
in Dublin. Two days later there were simultaneous, 20 minute attacks on both Wellington and
Portobello barracks, including an attempt to kill National Army commander Richard Mulcahy, who
lived inside the Portobello complex. Two civilians and one IRA man were killed in the attack on
Portobello. A soldier was shot in the head but survived.
On November 24, there was another ‘ineffective’ sniping attack on Wellington that caused no casualties.
In the New Year, on March 29 and May 26, 1923, the republican night attacks put some more bullet
holes in the walls of the barracks but failed to hit anyone. Two more sentries at the barracks were
also shot and killed at close range in separate incidents in March 1923, in what can only be described

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

53

as assassinations. The anti-Treaty IRA also tried to assassinate Frank Bolster (one of the intelligence
officers with a bad reputation) at the theatre in March 1923, shooting him but not killing him. For
their part, intelligence officers from the garrison shot a civilian, Hugh Haughton, on Donore Avenue
in March 1923, for having on him a copy of an IRA order to kill TDs.
However, compared to the initial months of the war, casualties in Dublin had dropped steeply – an
indication that the republicans’ campaign in the city was petering out. The anti-Treaty side officially
called off their campaign in May 1923.
The Intelligence Department in Wellington Barracks did not outlast the Civil War. Both Liam Tobin and
Charles Dalton were sidelined in a National Army reorganisation of early 1923. Tobin was made aide
de camp of the Governor General and Dalton was made adjutant of the air service. They complained
afterwards about being kept away from intelligence work. For this reason Dalton and Tobin were
leaders of an attempted mutiny in March 1924 for which they were forced to resign from the Army.
Wellington was renamed Griffith Barracks in late 1922 after Arthur Griffith, the first President of the
Executive Council of the Free State, who had died of a stroke during the Civil War in August 1922. The
Civil War was perhaps the darkest chapter of the barracks’ history. Much blood had been spilt and
much suffering caused there, on both sides. Griffith Barracks, as it was now called, looked uneasily
into its future in an independent Ireland.

54

GRIFFITH BARRACKS IN THE IRISH CIVIL WAR 1922-23

Chapter 4
Griffith Barracks 1923-1991
View of bomb damage on the South Circular Road, January 1941,
taken from behind the Griffith Barracks’ railings.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

55

G

riffith Barracks emerged from the trauma of the Civil War into a peacetime role as a garrison
for the much reduced Irish Army.

The Aftermath of the Civil War and the 1930s
In the wake of the Civil War, one of the first tasks facing the new government of the Irish Free State was
to cut the size of its army. Out of a total government expenditure in 1923-24 of about £30 million, £10.5
million was spent on the National Army. From a high of 58,000 men during the Civil War, consuming
some 30% of the new state’s expenditure, it was reduced to 14,000 men in 1924, and by the 1930s was
down to fewer than 10,000.
At Griffith Barracks, some special corps, which had been formed for the specific demands of the Civil
War, were disbanded. One such unit was the Railway Protection, Repair and Maintenance Corps, which
was charged with keeping the railways running amid the republican sabotage campaign. They moved
into Griffith on January 12, 1923 and, their work completed, were disbanded in September 1923. The
Intelligence Department, which had such a bad reputation during the Civil War was absorbed into a
smaller, more specialised military intelligence section nicknamed the Second Bureau (later G2).

The Irish Army parades in 1933 for the Papal Nuncio’s visit. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

56

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

By November 1923, such was the
peaceful mood prevailing at Griffith that
the Army journal An tÓglach devoted
an extensive report to ‘Hallwe’en
at Griffith Barracks’. There was, it
reported, “a very successful Military
Boxing Tournament followed by a
highly enjoyable concert”. It continued,
“Early in the day, many hands were
involved, under the capable supervision
of Comdt. Farrelly in decorating the
spacious Recreation Hall”. In 1924,
The Irish Times reported on the visit of
the National Army chess team to the
barracks. There does appear to have
been a small scandal at Griffith in 1924,
however, when a commandant, Patrick
Geraghty, was charged at the Dublin
District Court with the embezzlement
of £292 belonging to the laundry fund
at Griffith Barracks.

Belongings loaded on a cart, the South Circular Road, January 1941.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Still, It was a far cry from November
1922, when the barracks was full of prisoners and bullets had rained down one morning on recruits
at morning parade.
With the Army reduced in size after the Civil War, parts of the complex fell out of military use. Part of
the parade ground was purchased by the Irish Amateur Boxing Association in 1937 (headed by former
National Army general W.R.E. Murphy) and made into what is now the National Stadium.
Other parts were leased out into private hands. In September 1924, the barracks’ married quarters
was rented to Greenmount and Boyne Linen Company of Harold’s Cross, who housed the families of
their workers there. Four blocks of the barracks were used, comprising 40 flats of 3-4 rooms each,
complete with running water and electricity. While the same blocks would in later decades become bywords for the worst type of slum housing in Dublin, in 1924, with over 25,000 families in the city living
in one-room tenements, with no running water or electricity, the accommodation for the workers of
Greenmount and Boyne must have seemed relatively good.
In the inter-war years, the Irish Army’s garrison at Griffith was joined by the Army Corps of Engineers.

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

57

The Emergency
In 1938, with the clouds of war looming on the European mainland, a joint Army-Garda gas training
course was held in Griffith in preparation for a possible chemical weapons attack on Dublin by one
of the belligerents.
Just a year later, war did break out with Germany’s invasion of Poland and Britain and France’s
subsequent declaration of war on Germany. However, it was the fall of France in 1940 that brought the
reality of war close to neutral Ireland. Both Germany (looking for a way to attack Britain) and Britain
(being anxious to regain control over the ‘Treaty ports’ of Cork, Berehaven and Lough Swilly which
it had surrendered in 1938) drew up contingency plans for invading independent Ireland (popularly
named Éire rather than the Free State since the 1937 constitution). To respond to these threats, the
Irish Army had to be rapidly and quickly expanded for the duration of the war, or as it was called in
Ireland, the Emergency.
A reserve, the Local Defence Force (LDF) was also established. The strength of the armed forces was
temporarily brought up from about 13,000 in 1940 to some 41,000 for the duration of the war, with
another 88,000 (mostly hastily trained and poorly equipped) men in the LDF. Several units of the
LDF, including a contingent of 200 students from University College Dublin, were based in Griffith
Barracks. The UCD contingent first paraded in Griffith in November 1941.
Effectively, therefore, there was a new ‘Emergency Army’. A new battalion, the 14th, was raised and
based in Griffith Barracks. The 14th was commanded by Colonel Joe Byrne with Commandant Kerins
serving as second in Command. Many of the early recruits were veterans of the War of Independence
and Civil War, who called themselves ‘[19]22 men’. To some extent, across the country, common service
during the Emergency helped to heal the rifts caused by the Civil War, and so it was in Griffith. The
14th Battalion included Joe Dolan, the former IRA Squad man and National Army Intelligence Officer,
who had once been described by one of his enemies as “the worst terrorist in Wellington barracks”.
Dolan had clearly not shed the ways of the gunman. He was described as “wearing his service revolver
slung low on his thigh, he would stroll around the square in a detached manner”, perhaps thinking of
what he had done there during the Civil War.
His former enemy Joseph O’Connor, who had been held in Griffith Barracks during the Civil War, also
served during the Emergency in the Local Defence Force (he was charged with guarding Government
buildings in Merrion Street), as did many other former anti-Treatyites. Whether or not there was ever
a personal reconciliation between Dolan and O’Connor, the fact that they were now wearing the same
uniform did signify that the pain of the internecine conflict of 1922-23 was starting to recede.
Initially equipment was scarce and the soldiers in the 14th Battalion were issued with a mixture of
equipment dating from the Great War, regular Army equipment and whatever else came to hand. The

58

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

Aftermath of the North Strand Bombings, 1941 – troops from Griffith were used in the rescue operation.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

soldiers were charged with manning posts throughout Dublin each night. One hundred and fifty men,
including detachments at banks, government buildings, the power station at Ringsend and elsewhere
were on duty each night. Up to 1942, soldiers could sometimes have to do 100 hours duty each week.
On occasion this guard duty included mounting a cordon in Seville Place in the north inner city for
men wanted by the Gardaí. The most dangerous moments for Irish neutrality were in late 1940 and
early 1941 when it appeared that a German invasion of Britain was imminent.
Throughout the autumn, winter and spring of 1940-1941, the Irish Army trained and prepared to repel
an invasion from any quarter, whether an attack by British forces from Northern Ireland or a German
airborne invasion in the south. When this did not transpire, the Irish Army was put to work at other
tasks, including cutting turf, more of which was needed as a result of the war-enforced absence of
coal. The soldiers based at Griffith were set to work cutting turf at Timahoe in County Laois and even
won a turf cutting competition in Kildare in 1942. Another task in which they were employed was
dealing with an outbreak of foot and mouth disease in 1941. Soldiers had to shoot the infected cattle
and bury their corpses in trenches.
However, in the absence of foreign invasion, the most challenging work for the Emergency Army at
Griffith proved to be rescue work in the aftermath of a German air raid in 1941.
In the early hours of January 3, 1941 it must have seemed for a moment that the war had come to
Dublin. At 03.55 soldiers in Griffith were awakened by massive explosions as an aircraft dropped
bombs on the South Circular Road, just yards from the perimeter of the barracks. Though the barracks
was not hit, nearby houses were and the soldiers were among those who responded. For the next few
hours they helped to rescue people trapped in the ruins of their houses. In all, 22 people were injured,
none fatally. That night bombs were dropped on five counties in Ireland. In all cases, examination

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

59

of the bomb fragments proved that they
had been dropped by German aircraft
which were lost and had dumped their
bomb-loads to lighten the aircraft. The
Army’s official statement read:

Evening Herald, Friday January 3, 1941

At 3:55 a.m. an unidentified aircraft
dropped one bomb in Donore Terrace,
South Circular Road, Dublin and destroyed
two houses, seriously damaged a third and
did slighter damage to the other houses
in the area. Some twenty people were
injured, but none seriously. The battalion
of the Defence Forces stationed at Griffith
Barracks turned out within a few minutes
of the explosion and went to the aid of those
who had been affected by the bombing’.

The Irish government made a formal complaint to Germany about the bombing, which like other
German raids on Ireland are thought to have been mistakes on the part of German pilots. It was a
small taste of war, one that anticipated the tragedy of the North Strand bombing a few months later
on May 31, 1941. Troops from Griffith were mobilised to help victims in the North Strand, where 29
people were killed in the bombing, with 90 injured and 300 houses destroyed or damaged. Almost 400
people were left permanently or temporarily homeless.
Paying tribute to the service of the Emergency volunteers, the Minister for Defence Frank Aiken,
addressing a parade of anti-air raid personnel at Griffith in 1944, told them that their voluntary service
and unity had saved the country in the five disastrous years of war and had helped to preserve the
national policy of neutrality. The 14th Battalion was demobilised at the war’s end. Griffith Barracks
was subsequently occupied by the 5th and 18th Infantry Battalions of the regular army from November
to December 1946, but it then lay unoccupied by the military for several years.
In the meantime, the Labour Court occupied part of the barracks in 1947 as did the Office of Public
Works or OPW from 1946 until 1966.

The barracks from the 1950s to the 1980s
In 1953, Griffith Barracks was reoccupied for military use by a new battalion under Commandant
George Heffernan. With various parts of the complex in daily use by civilians, the normal military
security precautions were compromised, as people going to and from the Labour Court wandered in
and out. At one point Commandant Heffernan closed the gates and refused to let any civilians in until
they could produce proof of their identity – an action that caused a minor sensation at the time. From

60

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

this point onwards, a civilian messenger was posted on the gate to escort those making their way to
the arbitration court.
In 1956 the IRA launched what they named ‘Operation Harvest’, better known as the ‘Border Campaign’,
against targets in Northern Ireland. In response, the garrison at Griffith was ordered to send three
reinforced companies to the border area to combat ‘subversive activities’ – in reality trying to impede
the actions of the IRA. The IRA’s campaign had run out of steam by 1961, but after 1969, when conflict
again erupted within Northern Ireland, internal security within the Republic again became a priority.
In 1966, the Irish state commemorated the 50th anniversary of the Easter Rising of 1916. During
Easter Week itself the Barracks, then known as Wellington, had been occupied by small and rather
scared garrison of British troops but had largely been left alone. In 1966 however, what was now
Griffith Barracks was occupied by the Irish Army, which traced its ancestry back to those Volunteers
who had sniped at Wellington in 1916. For the commemoration ceremony of the 1916 rising Colonel
Ned Cusack, on horseback, led the colour guard out of Griffith Barracks on Easter Sunday 1966 to the
parade on O’Connell Street. This troop was presented to the then-President Eamon De Valera, who in
1916 had been a commandant in the Volunteers.
Ned Cusack, who commanded the honour guard, had been transferred to Griffith Barracks in 1958
and in 1959 became the Commander of 20th Battalion FCA. D Company of the FCA, which formed
the honour guard in the parade of 1966. This was an Irish-speaking unit named Pearse Company
and its members were practically all students, mainly from UCD, Clongowes, Newbridge, Belvedere,
O’Connell Schools and De La Salle Churchtown. Cusack later recalled that, “one of the Clongowes
students was John Bruton , a subsequent Taoiseach”.
Of the 1966 parade, Cusack remembered:
The 20th FCA battalion marched out the gate of the barracks down the South Circular Road to Harcourt
Street and Dame Street passing the awaiting throngs in O’Connell Street,saluting the President on the
GPO platform loaded with male and female VIPs and then marching back to Griffith via Camden Street
and the South Circular Road. Tired and weary after a rather extended march.The 20th battalion on the
march consisted of 4 companies of about 120 men in each company – one of these companies conducted
all its military training in Irish. All the battalion troops were Dublin City natives from all strata of society
and I must say it was a great honour to lead such hard working, humorous and loyal young men.
Incidentally, a commentary was broadcast by Miceal O’Hehir as the Army marched past the President at
the GPO. Almost like a match broadcast in Croke Park !

In the 1970s, the Army was again expanded against the background of the Northern Ireland conflict
and Griffith was again full, garrisoned by the 20th Battalion and Motor Corps along with the 2nd AntiAircraft Battery, the 2nd Garrison Military Police Corps, Eastern Command Area Records, and the
Observer Corps.

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

61

1916 Jubilee Commemorations – parade and ceremonies at the General Post Office, Dublin. President Eamon de Valera,
accompanied by Commandant Daniel O’Connell, inspects the Guard of Honour at the G.P.O. prior to the Military Parade.
The Guard of Honour was furnished by the 20th Infantry Battalion from Griffith Barracks which were led from the barracks
to O’Connell Street by Col. Ned Cusack. (Courtesy of the Irish Photo Archive)

Alongside the regulars was a battalion of reserves or Forsa Cosanta Aituil (FCA) troops. The FCA had
previously been ‘shadows’ of regular battalions, but from 1979 had autonomous units of their own.
The reserves, among them future President of Griffith College Diarmuid Hegarty, then had a small
cadre of regulars who provided training and leadership, while the part-time soldiers had one training
day per week at the barracks and one all day training day per month.

62

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

The last Irish Army parade in
Griffith Barracks on September 15th,
1988. The inspecting officers are
Brigadier General Monahan, General
Officer Commanding of the Eastern
Command, escorted by Comandants
McCann and Whelan and Captain
Hynes, all of the Cavalry Squadron.
(Courtesy of An Cosantóir, ‘Farewell to
Griffith’, September 1988)

The various civilian organisations based in Griffith, including the Labour Court, the Census of
Population staff, the Dumping Body, and the Association of Parents and Friends of Mentally
Handicapped Children, had to be relocated elsewhere, the last leaving in 1976.
The security risk posed to the state was highlighted by a shooting just outside Griffith Barracks on
March 26, 1983. A sentry outside Griffith witnessed the shooting and fatal injuring of a prison officer,
Brian Stack, who was shot by republican paramilitaries as he left the National Boxing Stadium, and
died some months later.

Slums and Housing agitation
In 1962, Dublin Corporation took over some of the buildings at Griffith – the bank block and canteen,
and used them for emergency housing for families from the inner city slums. At this time Dublin had
a critical shortage of social housing and at its old core, a concentration of slum dwellings. Over 6,000
families were thought to live in overcrowded conditions and more lived in condemned buildings.
The following year, the married quarters, which since 1924 had been leased by Greenmount and
Boyne Linen Company for their workers, was also taken over by the corporation for use as emergency
housing.
The accommodation at Griffith was to be used as a stop gap while decent housing was built elsewhere
for families who had been living in condemned buildings in the city centre. Indeed, in one case in
1964, a family was housed in Griffith after the building they lived in collapsed altogether. By this
time though, the old married quarters were in a very poor state of repair. What was more it had been

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

63

decided that the housing at Griffith would only be used for women and children – their husbands and
fathers would have to look elsewhere.
In 1963, there was a protest at Griffith about the poor conditions faced by the families housed there. In
particular, the people living there objected to the fact that the husbands of families were not allowed to
live in the accommodation. In December 1963, several men scaled the walls of Griffith to try to be with
their families but were ordered out again by plainclothes policemen and officials of the Dublin Health
Authority. In response, three families, the Quinns, the Flynns and the Morris’s (a total of thirteen
people) left the barracks and moved themselves into an abandoned house on nearby Clanbrassil
Street. They alleged that they had been on the housing waiting list for five years.
In 1964, the Minster for Local Government, Neil Blaney, told the Dáil that 89 people were living in
the Corporation-run housing at the Barracks, 23 women, 49 children and 17 men. In 1969, the Dublin
Housing Action Committee were still complaining about the ‘broken families’ in Griffith and claimed
that 14,000 new houses needed to be built in the Dublin Corporation area to clear effectively the inner
city slums.
Nevertheless, it was not until the demands of the Irish Army required the return of the buildings in the
barracks to military use that the last families moved out of Griffith in 1977.
By the late 1980s, the Irish Army decided to consolidate its barracks around the country and to shut
some of its installations. The Army left Griffith in 1988, with the marching-out ceremony, on September
15th 1988, being presided over over by Commandant McCann of the Second Cavalry Squadron who
presented his troops to Brigadier General P Monahan. The Cavalry Squadron moved to Cathal Brugha
Barracks while the FCA units based in Griffith were moved to Cathal Brugha, Collins and McKee
Barracks. The buildings then lay empty for a number of years.

64

GRIFFITH BARRACKS 1923-1991

Chapter 5
Arthur Griffith
Arthur Griffith departing for London from
Dun Laoghaire for the Treaty Conference, 1921.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

65

A

rthur Griffith, after whom Wellington Barracks was renamed in
1923, was one of the most influential Irish nationalist leaders of
his generation. Griffith was born in 1871 at 61 Upper Dominick
Street, Dublin and was educated at the Christian Brothers’ Schools at
Strand Street and St Mary’s Place. He worked as a printer, coming
under the influence of the journalist and poet William Rooney, with
whom he became active in the Gaelic League. He spent around two
years in South Africa working in the gold mines there and editing a
small English-language journal. He returned to Ireland in 1899 with
the Boer War raging in South Africa and, perhaps radicalised by that
conflict in which he had supported the Boers against the British Empire,
he became more heavily involved in nationalist politics in Ireland. He
became editor of the new weekly radical paper, the United Irishman,
first published in Dublin in March 1899. In 1900, together with Rooney, he
established an organisation named Cumann na nGaedheal.
In 1905 he established a separatist party known as Sinn Féin. Griffith argued, in a book entitled The
Resurrection of Hungary, that Irish nationalists should model their search for independence on that
of Hungary. There, elected representatives had seceded from the Austrian Habsburg parliament and
set up their own parliament under the sovereignty of the Habsburg monarch. They had thus been
recognised as equal parts of the Austro-Hungarian ‘dual-monarchy’. In the same way, Griffith argued
that Irish MPs should withdraw from Westminster and declare an Irish parliament in existence. A
campaign of passive resistance might be necessary but ultimately Ireland could be an equal but
separate part of a ‘dual-monarchy’.
Sinn Féin’s economic policy was based on making Ireland self-sufficient and the promotion of Irish
industry. To this end, Griffith’s newspaper Sinn Féin proposed such measures as Irish control over
Irish banking and tariffs, the creation of an Irish merchant marine, reforestation, a return to tillage
farming instead of ‘ranching’, and other policies designed to increase employment and make Ireland
economically independent. Griffith was opposed to extreme radical labour and criticised the militant
Transport Union leader James Larkin during the strike or ‘lockout’ of 1913, on the grounds that his
methods would damage Irish trade.
However, Sinn Féin was initially quite unsuccessful. It had no Members of Parliament before 1917
and only a handful of county councillors, mostly in Dublin city, where its best result was getting 12
councillors elected in 1910 in an election where 80 seats were available. They briefly had one MP in
1908 when sitting MP in North Leitrim, Charles Dolan, resigned from the Irish Parliamentary Party
and joined Sinn Féin, but he was subsequently defeated in a by-election.
The Irish Republican Brotherhood initially funded the Sinn Féin newspaper with money from Clan na

66

ARTHUR GRIFFITH

Gael in America, and for a time their activists campaigned for Sinn Féin in elections. From about 1910
though, coinciding with the growing influence of Tom Clarke and Seán McDermott who favoured
armed insurrection, the organisation became increasingly disillusioned with electoral politics and
instead concentrated on preparing for future armed revolt. Griffith was a member of the IRB, possibly
up until 1910, after which time he generally eschewed the use of physical force for political ends.
Griffith opposed the involvement of Irishmen in the First World War on Britain’s side and his
newspaper was shut down and his printing press seized in late 1914. Griffith and Sinn Féin played no
part in the Easter Rising of 1916 but he was nevertheless arrested after it and imprisoned in Reading
Gaol together with other prominent separatists such as IRB man Ernest Blythe, Sinn Féin activist
Herbert Moore Pim, labour organiser P.T. Daly, and the Cork Volunteer leaders Tomás MacCurtain
and Terence MacSwiney. He was released, however, as part of the general amnesty of prisoners in
December of 1916.
Once released, the veterans of the Rising, together with the pre-war Sinn Féin activists, coalesced
in a new Sinn Féin party that would act as a vehicle for all radical nationalist politics. The new Sinn
Féin had some continuity with Arthur Griffith’s original party in that its principal strategy was to win
elections in Ireland and having done that, to abstain from the Westminster Parliament, declare an Irish
parliament to be in session and to secede from the United Kingdom. However, this Sinn Féin, after
considerable internal debate, declared itself for an Irish Republic. Griffith declared himself agnostic
on the subject of a republic and it was only in October 1917, and at the insistence of Collins, de Valera

Griffith and De Valera with other
Treaty Plenipotentiaries on board
the boat to England.
(Courtesy of the National
Library of Ireland)

ARTHUR GRIFFITH

67

and other Rising veterans such as Cathal Brugha and Joseph McGuinness, that Sinn Féin pledged
itself to the pursuit of an Irish Republic.
In 1917, the new Sinn Féin had its first electoral success when Count George Plunkett, father of
Joseph, one of the executed leaders of 1916, won a by-election in Roscommon. Sinn Féin followed this
victory up with two more in Counties Clare and Longford. This was the first in a string of by-election
victories for Sinn Féin. In June 1918, Griffith himself was elected MP for East Cavan. In December
1918 the first general election after the First World War demonstrated that Irish opinion had swayed
dramatically away from the Irish Parliamentary Party and towards Sinn Féin, who won 73 out of 105
seats. Griffith was returned unopposed for East Cavan. He was also elected, as was possible at the
time, for Tyrone North West.
In January 1919, the Sinn Féin MPs met in Dublin’s Mansion House and proclaimed that they had
established an Irish Republic and that this assembly was the Dáil or Parliament of that republic. It
was a stunning vindication for Griffith’s political strategy. Griffith served as acting President of Dáil
Éireann while Eamon de Valera toured America.
Griffith
was
known
to be uneasy with the
use of violence in the
following years as the
British authorities tried
to suppress the republic
and the Irish Republican
Army or IRA attacked
their police and military in
Ireland. He was involved
in several attempts to end
the violence, conducting
secret negotiations with
the British throughout the
War of Independence.

Arthur Griffith chatting to
soldiers and civilians, c. 1922.
(Courtesy of the National
Library of Ireland)

68

ARTHUR GRIFFITH

Firstly, in the summer of 1920, top British civil
servants sent to Ireland, particularly a trio of
Alfred Cope, Warren Fisher and John Anderson,
recommended offering Dominion Status – the
same autonomy enjoyed by Canada and Australia
– to Sinn Féin. Through back channels, they
communicated this to the Irish leadership and it
appears that Arthur Griffith and Michael Collins
viewed this compromise positively. However, the
idea was not accepted at British cabinet level. It
would not be until late 1921 and after a radical
escalation of violence that such a proposal would
be offered in earnest by the British side.
Secondly, in late 1920, secret talks, carried out
via an intermediary between Lloyd George
and Arthur Griffith, had produced the bones of
another peace deal. Griffith presented the terms
to Collins and the Dáil cabinet, who reacted
favourably. A truce was scuppered, however, by
Hamar Greenwood, the hard-line Chief Secretary
for Ireland, who threatened to resign if there was
a truce before the IRA surrendered its weapons.
Griffith was imprisoned in December 1920 but
was subsequently released on 30 June 1921. In
July 1921, after six more months of violence, a
truce was finally reached.

Griffith, Barton and Collins, December 1921.

Negotiations then began on a settlement to the
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)
question of Irish independence. Eamon de Valera
declined to go to London for the negotiations
and instead sent Arthur Griffith as head of the Irish negotiating team, along with Michael Collins,
Eamon Duggan, Charles Gavan Duffy and Robert Barton. Erskine Childers went as secretary to the
delegation.
The British refused to countenance an Irish Republic but instead offered an Irish Free State with
dominion status. Northern Ireland (created in 1920) was given a period of a year to opt into or out
of the Free State. The British also insisted that Irish members of parliament would have to take an
oath of allegiance to the British monarch. Griffith advocated accepting the terms on the grounds

ARTHUR GRIFFITH

69

that they gave the Irish state enough autonomy in fiscal, legal and military terms on which to build
independence. However, when the negotiating team brought back the terms for the Dáil cabinet’s
perusal, the other members of the cabinet rejected it. De Valera told the negotiators that he might have
been willing to compromise on either Irish unity or on unconditional independence, but ‘you have got
neither this nor that’. The meeting was brought to an end when Griffith proposed that they not sign
the document in London but bring it back for the Dáil to vote on its acceptance.
Back in London on 4 December, Lloyd George told the Irish delegation it was either immediate
signature or war and that he had to know by the next day. Collins and Griffith impressed on Barton,
the last dissenter, that if he did not sign he alone would be responsible for a renewal of war. The Treaty
was signed in the early morning of 6 December 1921.
While many of those who supported the Treaty did so on the basis that it was the best that could be
achieved under the circumstances, Griffith defended it on its merits, arguing that ‘we have brought
back the flag, we have brought back the evacuation of Ireland after 700 years by British troops and the
formation of an Irish Army. We have brought back to Ireland her full rights of fiscal control’.
On the Treaty’s ratification by the Dáil, a Provisional Government, headed by Michael Collins and
Arthur Griffith (who was named President of the Second Dáil), was set up to transfer power from the
British administration to the Irish Free State.
When the Provisional Government and the Treaty settlement were threatened by a hardline anti-Treaty
IRA grouping who had occupied the Four Courts in central Dublin in April 1922, Griffith argued from
the start that they be removed by force. Collins, by contrast tried to conciliate the anti-Treatyites until
late June 1922, when a combination of a desire to assert the authority of the Provisional Government,
British pressure and anti-Treaty provocation forced his hand and he ordered the shelling of the Four
Courts. In the subsequent Civil War between pro and anti-Treaty supporters, Griffith suffered severely
from stress and had to be confined to a nursing home in August 1922. He resumed work as before but
died of what was probably a heart attack (he was suffering from hypertension) on 12 August 1922.
Just over a week later, his close colleague Michael Collins also died, killed in an ambush in County
Cork.
Griffith was given a state funeral and later he and Collins (and then Kevin O’Higgins) were
commemorated with a cenotaph in front of the new Irish parliament buildings at Leinster House. It
later fell into poor repair and was pulled down, but was replaced by an obelisk in honour of the two
men in 1956. Wellington Barracks was renamed Griffith Barracks in Arthur Griffith’s honour in late
1922 or early 1923. Today Griffith is remembered as one of the founding fathers of the Irish state.

70

ARTHUR GRIFFITH

Chapter 6
From Barracks to College
Aerial view of Griffith College as it is today.

71

T

he departure of the stationed officers and their families
in 1988, and the transfer of serving personnel to other
Dublin barracks, effectively marked the end of the
day-to-day activity at Griffith Barracks by the Irish Defence
Forces. In the years that followed, most of the buildings were
left completely unused, and with the passing of time, and no
ongoing maintenance, they fell into considerable disrepair.
By 1990, the only remaining use being made of the barracks
was of its medical centre to store archive material relating to
the personal tax returns of Irish citizens. As the information
was organised by county, the inclusion of the former names
King’s County, Queen’s County and Co. Leix provided an
insight into how regularly such information was being
accessed.
Without further use for the barracks, the State decided to sell the central 6.7 acres of the site by public
auction on 26th June 1991. Media commentators fully expected it to be acquired by developers for
intensive housing and commercial retail use. Instead it was purchased for conversion to a third level
college by Business and Accounting Training, at a cost of IR£1,750,000 (equivalent to €2,222,500).
The acquisition of the Barracks was reported in the media as a ‘new beginning’, the auction by Fintan
Gunne making RTÉ One’s six o’clock news programme.

Directors of Griffith College,
Pierce Kent, Professor Diarmuid
Hegarty and Reg Callanan
pictured after the purchase
of the barracks.

72

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

The Conference Centre and Halls of Residence

Business and Accounting Training, or BAT as it was better known, was established by Diarmuid
Hegarty in 1974 to prepare students for the professional examinations of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants in Ireland. As a qualified accountant and barrister, working originally from his home,
Diarmuid quickly established a reputation for excellent teaching and the examination successes
achieved by his students.
During the late 1970s and early 1980s, Diarmuid, along with his co-directors Pierce Kent, Roderick
Murphy, Frank Scott-Lennon and a small team of professional staff and lecturers, established the
College’s reputation as the premier provider of training leading to the professional examinations of
the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland (ACA). This achievement was clearly evidenced by
the College’s students taking first place in each of the final and penultimate examinations in 1983.
BAT was then joined by Reg Callanan, the College’s Director of Professional Programmes, who
extended the College’s teaching into other professional accountancy bodies, both nationally with CPA
and internationally with ACCA and CIMA. The College’s rapid growth in numbers was supported by
its move to rented premises initially in Milltown, subsequently in Ranelagh, and later in the acquisition
of its own premises on Morehampton Road, Donnybrook.
By 1990, BAT’s team and range of activities had extended beyond professional accountancy, with
Edmond Holohan managing the delivery of certificate and diploma programmes in computing from
City & Guilds and the National Computing Centre. Tomás Mac Eochagáin then joined the College

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

73

as Director of Academic Programmes to introduce the College’s degree programmes, starting with
Computing Science in association with the University of Ulster (UU).
For Diarmuid and his colleagues in BAT, the State’s auctioning of Griffith Barracks in June 1991
presented a unique opportunity. Where countless other buildings for sale in 1991 could have facilitated
the College’s expansion, Griffith Barracks was distinct in having the potential to provide third level
students with a genuine campus experience. The site’s character and ambience offered a vision of an
ideal learning environment not dissimilar to the campuses of Trinity, NUI-Galway and UCC. There
was plenty of space, listed buildings steeped in history, and it was located within and yet apart from
Dublin’s busy city centre.  
Given the long established association of Arthur Griffith with Griffith Barracks, the College felt it
appropriate that the link be continued into the future. Diarmuid Hegarty approached Ita Gray, only
surviving child of Arthur Griffith, to ask her consent for a change of name to Griffith College in
keeping with the naming of the barracks after her father. This request was granted by Ita and her
family, thereby facilitating the transition of Business and Accounting Training to Griffith College
Dublin, or GCD as it was to become better known.

From left: Lord Mayor Gay Mitchell,
Shane Gray, Grandson of Arthur
Griffith, Ita Gray, Daughter of Arthur
Griffith and Diarmuid Hegarty
President of Griffith College on the
occasion of the announcement of the
Griffith Scholarships on the 12th of
August 1992.

74

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

View of the campus college green, c. 2000.

Being able to focus on the potential of the barracks was a necessary key motivation for GCD staff as
they undertook to convert the site for use as a college. In particular, while the new location nominally
offered a five-fold increase in teaching accommodation, many of the buildings were entirely unsuitable
for occupation as the campus had become home in large part to foxes and pigeons. Reflecting on
the move, long-term Griffith faculty member and head of Professional Accountancy, Ann Donegan,
remembered how “the move from Morehampton Road to South Circular Road was both an exciting and
scary leap for the staff at Griffith College as they faced the challenge of developing and modernising
the campus”.
The redevelopment of the College’s existing buildings began in summer 1991. The first building to
be refurbished was a three storey red brick addition built at the time of conversion from prison to
barracks. This was refurbished at a cost of IR£180,000 and was then let to Tiernan Design School. To
retain a link to the past, the building was renamed the Wellington building.
The old barracks medical centre continued to house revenue files for a period after the purchase. This
lasted for about 18 months, during which continued the welcome presence of site security funded by
the Exchequer. On vacation of the building by the Revenue Commissioners, it was converted to rehouse the student restaurant and bar.

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

75

Refurbishment of the west block, renamed the Arthur
Griffith Building, commenced in June 1992, with the
firm Mahon McPhillips winning the tender and being
awarded the contract. While plans were initially drawn
up to develop both the west and the north blocks, work
was restricted to the west block as the College, like the
rest of the country, was hit by the credit crunch following
the 1992 currency crisis.
By September 1992, the College began to transfer its
own academic teaching activities from Morehampton
Road to the South Circular Road. The commencement
of activities in the newly refurbished sections of the
College was marked by an opening ceremony, attended
by Ita Gray and her family, at which a bust of Arthur
Griffith was unveiled and mounted in the College’s new
reception area.

Business Expansion Scheme Proposal 1993.

To facilitate further re-development, the College raised
IR£500,000 under the Business Expansion Scheme in April 1993 and a further IR£500,000 one year
later. It also sold its properties on Morehampton Road, Donnybrook, the sale of which had been
delayed by a collapse in property prices associated with the credit crunch. Under Reg Callanan’s
stewardship of the College as Managing Director during the 1990s, the College was enabled to fund
further refurbishment of buildings from operational cash flow.
Work was also carried out on the grounds of the College with the planting of trees and the creation of a
large central grass playing area, replacing the previously austere barracks square. These landscaping
developments provided walkways for students, while also upgrading the College’s electrical, plumbing
and data communications networks to meet its growing needs. Having located their offices in the
College, Conservation Volunteers Ireland developed an urban garden and tree nursery as a training
site on campus. This work was officially launched in April 1993 by the President of Ireland, Mary
Robinson.
While much development had yet to be undertaken, the sensitive refurbishment and revitalisation of
historic buildings, along with the landscaping of the campus, showed how new life and function could
be given to a vacated army barracks. The subsequent re-development of Collins’ Barracks into the
National Museum demonstrated another conservation success.
For Griffith College students, the move to the barracks represented a transformation of their College
experience. The hugely increased space available provided freedom for students to meet and socialise,

76

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

President Mary Robinson
officially launching the
Conservation Volunteer Ireland
Urban Project at Griffith
College in April 1993.
(Image courtesy of the Irish
Farmers Journal)

either through the various sports and social clubs or more generally by participating in the many
social events held in the College’s restaurant and bar. Academic resource developments included the
provision of a professional library service under the care of Robert McKenna and his team, along with
the ongoing development of computer laboratories. This transformation was captured in the College’s
marketing campaign at the time under the slogan ‘College by Name – University by Nature’.
In tandem with the move to the Griffith College Campus and its continued development, the 1990s
marked a period of considerable expansion for the College. It began with the development and growth
of its degree and diploma programmes in Computing Science, Business Studies, and Accounting and
Finance, all of which were validated by the University of Ulster. These programmes attracted a large
cohort of students from Northern Ireland, creating an opportunity for students from all counties in
Ireland to mix and study together towards common goals. For the period up to 1996, Northern Irish
students also benefitted from the direct funding of their programmes by the UK government.
The success and reputation for quality of Griffith’s degree programmes under the auspices of the
University of Ulster demonstrated its unswerving commitment to quality, and in 1992, Seamus
Brennan, TD and Minister for Education, officially approved Griffith College as a designated
institution of the National Council for Educational Awards (NCEA). This led to the College offering a
range of national certificate, national diploma and degree programmes under the auspices of the Irish
Government. These programmes complemented the College’s existing provision extending the range
of programmes into interior design and law.

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

77

Former Griffith Barracks personnel meet with
Prof. Diarmuid Hegarty on a visit to the campus in
May 1995. Pictured (l-r): Prof. Diarmuid Hegarty,
Cpl Thomas Kenny, Sgt John Griffin,
Tpr Liam Dunne and Tpr Gerry Murdiff.
(Courtesy of An Cosantóir, Military Archives,
Department of Defence)

Further
government
recognition
of
the College followed in 1999 with the
Department of Enterprise and Employment
funding the fees of students on the
College’s B.Sc. in Computing Science, and
by doing so extending funding for the first
time to an independent college. By the end
of the decade, admission to the College’s
academic programmes was managed
through the national CAO system alongside
programmes from the State’s universities
and other third level institutions.
Throughout the mid-1990s, the College
worked closely with Nottingham Trent
University (NTU). This extended the range
of degree programmes further to include
Irish Law, Business and Law, and International Hospitality Management.
The developing campus on the South Circular Road, with its library, computer laboratories, student
societies, restaurant and bar, attracted the interest of other related organisations resulting in many
temporarily re-locating on campus. These included:
– The Law Society of Ireland, which renovated the top floor of the north block, now called the Daniel
O’Connell building and ran their preparatory programmes in the College for a period of five years.
– Dublin’s Anna Livia, radio station which established their radio broadcasting station on campus
and remained on site for five years
– Brainwave – the Irish Epilepsy Association, which ran programmes for those with epilepsy
integrating them into mainstream third level education
Even more significantly, several organisations came and stayed on campus, often through their
integration with Griffith College. These organisations include:

78

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

– The Tiernan Design School which became the College’s Design Faculty
– Newman College’s Journalism School which relocated its programmes in journalism to Griffith
College and began the College’s Journalism and Media Faculty.
– Allied Computer Training and Advanced Technology Training, whose students progressed to
Griffith College following the closure of their organisations in the mid-1990s.
– Dublin International Foundation College, which offers its own suite of foundation and university
preparation programmes to international third level students.
In 1998, the College integrated the Leinster School of Music and Drama (LSMD) as a constituent
school within Griffith College. Established in 1904, the LSMD already had a longstanding tradition
of excellent teaching, along with the preparation of teachers nationwide. It also conducted graded
examinations nationwide, with over 15,000 students taking their examinations annually. Joining the
College brought students of drama, classical and traditional music and opera together with the rest of
an increasingly diverse student body.
Being part of Grifffith College, the development of the LSMD led to the provision of Higher Diploma
programmes in both Music Education and Drama Education along with the recognition of its grades
by Quality and Qualifications, Ireland (QQI). At the same time, it preserved the School’s historic
links with its past through the continued use of its Teacher Diploma Parchments designed by Grace
Plunkett, the Irish artist and cartoonist who was active in the Republican movement, and who married
Joseph Plunkett in Kilmainham Goal only a few hours before he was executed for his part in the 1916
Easter Rising.
By the end of the 1990s, under the marketing direction of Ronan Fenelon, the College had experienced
considerable growth in the number of Irish students attending its courses. From 1994 onwards,
recruitment of international students was to become a key component of the growth of the College.
Students were recruited from as near as Northern Ireland and Norway to as far as China, India and
Pakistan. Indeed, Griffith College was the first higher education institution to recruit directly in China
under the enterprising direction of Leo O’Brien, the College’s International Marketing Director.

21st Century at Griffith College
While the 1990s had focused on the redevelopment of existing barrack buildings, the first years of the
new millennium brought even greater changes to the campus with the development of new facilities
for staff and students.
In June 2000, a modern glass structure known as the link block was completed at a cost of IR£215,000.
This provided direct internal connection between the west and north blocks, now named after Arthur
Griffith and Daniel O’Connell respectively.

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

79

The Griffith College Halls of Residence which were built to complement the original buildings.

The College then embarked on its most ambitious development to date - planning, commissioning
and financing the development of purpose built on-campus student accommodation for its students.
In October 2002, the College obtained planning permission on appeal from An Bord Pleanála to
construct two student accommodation blocks providing accommodation for 664 students, permission
having been originally refused by Dublin City Council. In support of the appeal, An Bord Pleanála
received a record number of 38 submissions favouring the development. Demolition of a number
of old buildings started in August 2003 with both blocks completed by March 2005 at a cost of €36
million.
Designed by Aidan Powell, architect and built by P.J Hegarty & Sons, the accommodation blocks are
architecturally sympathetic to the original buildings on campus with the added advantage of providing
extensive underground car parking facilities. As the students staying in the Halls of Residence rarely
required parking spaces, the largely unused facility proved a most welcome bonus for the College’s
other full-time and part-time students.
During the construction phase, some of the College’s teaching and administrative activities were
relocated to modular buildings newly acquired from the National College of Ireland as it relocated

80

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

from Ranelagh to the city centre. Catering and examination facilities were also provided by the
neighbouring National Stadium.
By the mid-2000s, it was clear that the College needed additional teaching, examining and catering
facilities to meet the needs of its growing Irish and international student body. This led to the
development of the College’s Conference Centre, by the same design and construction teams that
worked on the Halls of Residence. Construction began in March 2005 and was completed in March
2006 at the cost of €15.8 million. As part of the new complex, the College also built a dedicated design
facility. The new buildings were officially opened by An Taoiseach Bertie Ahern on 25th September
2006.
This large scale development of modern buildings marked a significant expansion in the College’s
footprint on site. Included in the construction of the Conference Centre building was a 650 seat
auditorium that could be converted readily to accommodate exhibitions, examinations and graduations.
Equally, it allowed for its rearrangement as three large lecture theatres.
Other floors of the building provide conference facilities, additional lecture theatres and administrative
offices. The entire basement floor is used for the College’s restaurant and bar. Following a poll by
students and staff, the new bar and restaurant facility was named Arthur’s, presumably in memory of
Arthur Griffith.
By the late 2000s, the Griffith College student experience had been transformed. The College now
had over 600 students living on campus and a flourishing Students’ Union which ensured strong
student engagement in the College’s societies and sporting clubs. For full-time students, the student
experience went beyond the end of the last lecture at 5pm, as they could now continue to enjoy
the College environs, for social, sporting and, of course, study purposes long into the evening.
Furthermore, the College’s student population had become increasingly enriched and diverse with the
presence of students from up to 60 countries.
Even during the summer months, when many colleges fall quiet, the College and its Halls of Residence
are alive with hundreds of overseas students attending English language summer camp courses with
the College’s English language school. In undertaking such projects the College has been fortunate to
have always had a strong team of qualified accountants on its board to manage the finances involved
under the careful direction of Pat Sheehan, the College’s finance director.
In remarking on the journey undertaken by the College following the completion of the buildings,
Pierce Kent summed up the moves as follows: “From little acorns…! From a basement in Miltown
Park, to a Georgian terrace in Ranelagh, to a former An Óige hostel in Donnybrook, to a bona fide
campus in Griffith Barracks. At last… a facility fitting as a seat of education and learning!”

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

81

The development of the College’s buildings could never have been realised without the parallel
successful development of the College’s academic and professional programmes managed by the
College’s heads of faculty, programme directors, lecturers and staff.
As Managing Director since 2000, Tomás Mac Eochagáin guided the further development of the
College’s educational provision and quality assurance systems. In the case of the College’s academic
programmes, this development led to a major strengthening of the academic qualifications and
related research activities of faculty staff resulting in the provision of postgraduate and master’s level
programmes in computing, business, law, media, design and education. This period in the College’s
history also saw a considerable diversification of the core disciplines being delivered to include
photography, fashion, hospitality management, film, sound engineering, digital technology, computer
games and music production.
These developments led to closer links with industry and employers, and enhanced the preparedness
of learners for the workplace, with students regularly winning national and international professional
awards. Further direct links with other organisations were established through the joint development
of accredited programmes with the Irish Small and Medium Enterprise Association (ISME), the
Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Ireland (CPA), Windmill Lane Academy, and Globe
Business College in Munich. The College also established Clarus Press, a legal publishing company
for specialist publications and peer reviewed law journals.
External research projects undertaken during this period included the annual International
Conference for Engaging Pedagogy (ICEP) established under the guiding hand of Fiona O’Riordan,
head of the College’s Centre for Promoting Academic Excellence, and the Innocence Project which
seeks to exonerate victims of miscarriages of justice, established by David Langwallner, Dean of the
College’s Law School.
The period from 2005 on saw the College extend its provision to Cork and Limerick through the
acquisition of Skerry’s Business College in Cork in 2005 and the Mid-West Business Institute, Limerick
in 2006. Both colleges had previously established an excellent reputation for providing third level
programmes under the auspices of the Higher Education and Training Awards Council (HETAC).
Working together, sharing the best of their combined experience, allowed all centres to provide a
wider and improved service to students. From 2006 onwards, the College adopted the name Griffith
College in place of the former Griffith College Dublin.
The 2000s was also a most successful period for the College’s professional programmes with its
centres in Dublin, Cork and Limerick achieving Gold and later Platinum Status with the Association
of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) in respect of their teaching quality. This recognition
was directly reflected in the ongoing national and worldwide prizewinning places achieved by the
College’s students.

82

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

Starting in 2004, the Griffith College Distinguished Fellowship and Professional Excellence Awards
were the brainchild of Prof Wallace Ewart former Pro Vice Chancellor of the University of Ulster
and long-time mentor of Griffith College. The Distinguished Fellowship Award was established to
recognise a major contribution at national or international level in the fields of business and public
administration.
The College’s Distinguished Fellowship Award holders to date include:
Seamus Heaney, MRIA, Poet and Nobel Laureate
John Hume, KCSG, Nobel Peace Laureate, SDLP Leader, MP and MEP
Mary McAleese, President of Ireland
The Hon. Mrs. Justice Susan Denham, Chief Justice of Ireland
Catherine Day, Secretary General of the EU Commission
Diljit Rana, Baron Rana, MBE, Member of the House of Lords
Peter Sutherland KCMG, SC, Attorney General and EU Commissioner
Denis O’Brien, MBA, Chairman, Communicorp Group Ltd
Martin Naughton, Founder and Chairman, Glen Dimplex Group
Gillian Bowler, Founder Budget Travel and Chairman, Fáilte Ireland
Edward Haughey, Baron Ballyedmond, OBE, Member of Seanad Eireann and the House of Lords,
Founder and Chairman, Norbrook Laboratories Ltd.
The Professional Excellence Award was established to recognise excellent performance in their
chosen profession of recipients of the award. Since its establishment there have been 13 recipients:
Mr Michael Cawley, Deputy Chief Executive, Chief Operating Officer, Ryanair
Dr Martin Newell, Former CEO, Central Applications Office
Mr Terence O’Rourke, Managing Partner, KPMG
Mr Paul Rellis, Managing Director, Microsoft
Fr Peter McVerry SJ, Founder, Peter McVerry Trust for Dublin Homeless
Mr Louis Copeland, Master Tailor
Mr George Hook, Journalist and Broadcaster
Mr Kevin Moran, Gaelic and Soccer Footballer
Mr John Bowman, Journalist, Broadcaster and Historian

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

83

Griffith College Distinguished Fellowship Award Recipients

84

The Hon. Mrs Justice Susan Denham
Chief Justice of Ireland
Distinguished Fellow 2013

Distinguished Fellow 2012

Peter Sutherland KCMG, SC
Attorney General & EU Commissioner
Distinguished Fellow 2011

Catherine Day
Sec. General of the EU Commission
Distinguished Fellow 2010

Diljit Rana, Baron Rana, MBE
Member of House of Lords
Distinguished Fellow 2009

Denis O’Brien, MBA
Chairman, Communicorp Group Ltd
Distinguished Fellow 2008

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

Seamus Heaney MRIA
Poet & Nobel Laureate

Mary McAleese
President of Ireland
Distinguished Fellow 2007

John Hume, KCSG
Nobel Peace Laureate
Distinguished Fellow 2006

Gillian Bowler
Founder, Budget Travel &
Chairman, Failte Ireland
Distinguished Fellow 2005

Martin Naughton
Founder & Chairman,
Glen Dimplex Group
Distinguished Fellow 2006

Edward Haughey,
Baron Ballyedmond, OBE
Member Seanad Eireann and House of Lords
Founder & Chairman, Norbrook Laboratories
Distinguished Fellow 2004
FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

85

Mr Frank Ryan, Founder Member of Society for Designers (now the Institute of Designers
in Ireland)
Dr Veronica Dunne, Internationally acclaimed opera singer, Royal Irish Academy of Music and
Leinster School of Music and Drama
Mr Richard Roche, Journalist, Author, Member of Irish Council for the Training of Journalists
and Founder of Griffith College Journalism School
Ms Sheila Murphy, Director, Leinster School of Music and Drama
In 2004, the College’s higher education programmes were placed on Ireland’s National Framework
of Qualifications (NFQ), and subsequently the College had its quality assurance procedures agreed
with HETAC. This led to the constitution of the College’s Academic and Professional Council (APC)
which became the custodian of the College’s standards governing its streams of academic and
professional training activities. In 2008, while maintaining its board of managers, the College adopted
the nomenclature more in common with other academic institutions of president and directors of
function.
In 2009, HETAC undertook a comprehensive external review of the entire College encompassing its
academic and administrative procedures. This quality audit commended the College on its Quality
Assurance Procedures and their effectiveness. It also confirmed that for students, the College’s
greatest strength lay in the quality and approachability of its lecturing and administrative team.
Following the review, and in recognition of HETAC’s confidence in the quality of the College’s staff
and procedures, HETAC devolved to the College many of the processes it previously reserved for itself
in relation to the validation and re-validation of its programmes of study.
Recognising the College’s significant presence in the Chinese market, Prof Diarmuid Hegarty in
2012 was awarded an honorary professorship from the Beijing Information, Science and Technology
University in China.
In line with the College’s increasing experience of both international students and quality assurance
systems, it led the development of quality standards for the provision of international education on
behalf of the IHEQN, the Irish Higher Education Quality Network. Established in 2003, the IHEQN
provides a forum for the discussion of quality assurance and quality improvement issues amongst the
principal national stakeholders involved in the quality assurance of higher education and training
in Ireland. Currently chaired by Professor Diarmuid Hegarty of Griffith College, the network’s
members include the Irish Universities Association, Institutes of Technology Ireland, the Department
of Education and Science, the Royal College of Surgeons, Quality and Qualifications Ireland and the
Higher Education Authority.

86

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

The Academic Year 2013/14
The commencement of the 2013/14 academic year marks the 40th anniversary of Griffith College.
Since its foundation, the College has grown to become Ireland’s largest private third-level college
with over 7,000 students at its campuses in Dublin, Cork and Limerick. The year also marks Griffith
College’s move to larger campuses in Cork and Limerick.
In delivering the programmes, a total of over 400 specialist and professional staff commit themselves
to the educational and personal development of the College’s learners, to their own development and
that of the College. Of those, almost 200 do so on a full-time basis. Without this team and the support
of external agencies such as the QQI, HEA, NTU, UU and the professional examination bodies, Griffith
College would simply not survive, let alone prosper.

Griffith College Limerick.

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

87

Griffith College Cork.

The current profile of the students stands in certain contrast to that of the first classes offered by
Diarmuid Hegarty back in 1974. While continuing to teach professional accountancy along with a
wide range of professional and academic programmes, the College’s courses have expanded further
into new areas to include government funded programmes in digital marketing and cloud computing.
Thanks to the College’s partnerships with over 140 universities and higher education institutions
internationally, it now welcomes students from over 77 countries, further enriching student life for
all. France, Germany, China, India, Norway, the US and Brazil are just some of the main countries
from which the College’s students are drawn. This mix of Irish and international students on campus
has added considerably to the learning experience of all cohorts, providing an experience and
understanding of different cultures invaluable in today’s global economy.

88

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

As in previous years, the College continues to nurture successful prizewinning students. While some
will secure such recognition during their years at the College, others will inevitably become famous
in their subsequent careers, perhaps following in the footsteps of recent alumni like the writer Cecila
Ahern, TD Helen McEntee, presenter Laura Whitmore, and journalists Chris Donoghue and Henry
McKean, along with several former past presidents of professional accountancy bodies and CEOs of
multinational companies.
Looking back further into the alumni of Griffith’s constituent colleges, they may even become another
Taoiseach (Jack Lynch – Skerry’s Business College), or Nobel Laureate (Samuel Beckett – Leinster
School of Music and Drama).
To students entering Griffith College in 2013/14, the campus presents a lively sight of optimistic and
talented students from many countries pursuing higher education. Perhaps only a few will ever be
aware of those who shared the same ground before them, as students, soldiers or prisoners during the
200 years of history which are encapsulated within the historic campus.
It will be difficult for new students to recall that hundreds of prisoners were once kept here for minor
crimes, that two men were executed and buried here in unmarked graves in the 19th century, and that
the barracks witnessed violence and bloodshed throughout the Easter Rising, Anglo-Irish War and
more especially in the Civil War, when hundreds of prisoners were again incarcerated in its buildings.
In naming the College’s buildings after Griffith, O’Connell, Meagher, Stephens, Wellington and others,
the College wishes to respect and preserve the campus’ links with its history.
For the most part, it can be expected that students will be busy building their own memories and
creating a continuing history for the College based around their many friendships, the events they
have enjoyed, and the time they spent advancing their careers in the company of others. In doing so, it
is hoped that when they have opportunities to reflect on their own journeys, they will look back fondly
on their experience at Griffith College and regard it as one of the most enjoyable and successful parts
of their lives.

FROM BARRACKS TO COLLEGE

89

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Reports from Commissioners, Session,
Vol. XXXVI, Prisons, Scotland and Ireland,
January 24 – August 28, 1860
Return to the House of Commons on
Richmond Bridewell Dublin Expenditure,
18 August 1892. (Digitised University of
Southampton)
Report on Richmond Bridewell, Appendix
to 49th Report of Commissioners on Prisons
(Ireland and Scotland), Vol. XXX,
9 February – 21 August 1871
National Archive 1911 census
Military Census 1922

Parliamentary Debates
Criminal Law and Procedure (Ireland) Act
– Arrest of Members – House of Commons
Debate February 9, 1888
Dáil Éireann – Ceisteanna – 13 September,
1922, Military Prisoners.
Dáil Éireann – Volume 1 – 04 October, 1922,
Treatment of Prisoners.

Bureau of Military History
Eamon Broy, WS 1,284
Cahir Davitt WS 1751
Gerard Doyle WS 1511
Kit Farrell WS 1299
Edward Handley WS 625
Robert Holland WS 280
Seamus Kavanagh WS 493
Thomas McCarthy WS 307
Joseph McGuiness WS 607

90

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Joseph O’Connor WS 157, 487, 544
Padraig O’Connor WS 813

Journal articles
Comdt. P.D. O’Donnell, Griffith Barracks
Dublin, Barracks and Post of Ireland, No 28,
An Cosantoir, November 1978.
P.D. O’Donnell, Griffith Barracks Dublin,
Barracks and Post of Ireland No 29 , An
Cosantoir, January 1979
Doyle, Rob, National Graves Association
entry on Joseph Poole, online at http://www.
nga.ie/Fenians-Joseph_Poole.php
http://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/cgi-bin/pape
rspast?a=d&d=CHP18840114.2.21.4
Durney, James, How Aungier/ Camden
Street became known as the Dardanelles,
The Irish Sword, Summer 2010 No. 108 Vol.
XXVII
Kinsella, Anthony, The British Evacuation,
The Irish Sword, No. 82
Walsh, Paul V, The Irish Civil War, a study of
the Conventional phase, A paper delivered
to NYMAS at the CUNY Graduate Center,
New York, N.Y. on 11 December 1998

Books
Balthrop, Micheal, The Old Contemptibles,
Osprey 1989.
Carroll-Burke, Patrick, Colonial Discipline,
The Making of the Irish Convict System,
Four Courts Press, Dublin 2000.
Geoghegan, Patrick, Liberator, The Life and
Death of Daniel O’Connell,1830-1847, Gill &
MacMillan, Dublin 2010.

Hopkinson, Michael, Green Against Green,
The Irish Civil War, Gill & MacMillan,
Dublin 2004.
Kennerk, Barry, Shadow of the
Brotherhood, The Temple Bar Shootings,
Mercier Press, Cork 2010.
Laird, Frank, Personal Experiences of the
Great War, Eason and Sons, 1925.
Lewis, Samuel, A Topographical Dictionary
of Ireland, London, 1837.
MacDonald, Lyn, 1914, The Days of Hope,
Penguin 1987.
McManus, Ruth, Shaping Dublin City and
Suburbs, 1910-1940, Four Courts Press,
Dublin 2002.
O’Connor, Diarmuid and Connolly, Frank,
Sleep Soldier Sleep, The Life and Times of
Padraig O’Connor, Miseab, Dublin 2011.
O Grada, Cormac, Black ’47 and Beyond,
The Great Irish Famine in History and
Memory, Princeton University Press,
New Jersey, 1999.

Newspapers
The Irish Times archive
New York Times archive

Imagery and photography sources
National Library of Ireland, Kildare Street,
Dublin 2
Ordnance Survey Ireland, Phoenix Park,
Dublin 8
Irish Photo Archive Ltd. 17 Nottingham St,
North Strand, Dublin 3
Irish Farmers Journal, Irish Farm Centre,
Bluebell, Old Nace Road, Dublin 12
Christian Brothers, Edmund Rice House,
North Richmond St., Dublin 1
Military Archives, Cathal Brugha Barracks,
Military Rd, Dublin 6
Harpers Weekly
Robert Delaney
Irish Architectural Archive,
45 Merrion Square, Dublin 2

Sheehan, William, Fighting for Dublin,
The British Battle for Dublin, Collins Press,
Cork 2008.
Vaughan, W.E, Murder Trials in Ireland
1836-1914, Four Courts Press, Dublin, 2009.
Yeates, Padraig, Dublin, A City in Wartime
1914-1918, Gill & MacMillan, Dublin 2011.
The Wolfe Tone Annual 1962.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

91

Griffith College Dublin
A history of the campus 1813-2013

9 781906 878078

South Circular Road
Dublin 8, Ireland
www.gcd.ie


