Arthur Griffith, after whom Wellington Barracks was renamed in
1923, was one of the most influential Irish nationalist leaders of
his generation. Griffith was born in 1871 at 61 Upper Dominick
Street, Dublin and was educated at the Christian Brothers’ Schools at
Strand Street and St Mary’s Place. He worked as a printer, coming
under the influence of the journalist and poet William Rooney, with
whom he became active in the Gaelic League. He spent around two
years in South Africa working in the gold mines there and editing a
small English-language journal. He returned to Ireland in 1899 with
the Boer War raging in South Africa and, perhaps radicalised by that
conflict in which he had supported the Boers against the British Empire,
he became more heavily involved in nationalist politics in Ireland. He
became editor of the new weekly radical paper, the United Irishman,
first published in Dublin in March 1899. In 1900, together with Rooney, he
established an organisation named Cumann na nGaedheal.
In 1905 he established a separatist party known as Sinn Féin. Griffith argued, in a book entitled The
Resurrection of Hungary, that Irish nationalists should model their search for independence on that
of Hungary. There, elected representatives had seceded from the Austrian Habsburg parliament and
set up their own parliament under the sovereignty of the Habsburg monarch. They had thus been
recognised as equal parts of the Austro-Hungarian ‘dual-monarchy’. In the same way, Griffith argued
that Irish MPs should withdraw from Westminster and declare an Irish parliament in existence. A
campaign of passive resistance might be necessary but ultimately Ireland could be an equal but
separate part of a ‘dual-monarchy’.
Sinn Féin’s economic policy was based on making Ireland self-sufficient and the promotion of Irish
industry. To this end, Griffith’s newspaper Sinn Féin proposed such measures as Irish control over
Irish banking and tariffs, the creation of an Irish merchant marine, reforestation, a return to tillage
farming instead of ‘ranching’, and other policies designed to increase employment and make Ireland
economically independent. Griffith was opposed to extreme radical labour and criticised the militant
Transport Union leader James Larkin during the strike or ‘lockout’ of 1913, on the grounds that his
methods would damage Irish trade.
However, Sinn Féin was initially quite unsuccessful. It had no Members of Parliament before 1917
and only a handful of county councillors, mostly in Dublin city, where its best result was getting 12
councillors elected in 1910 in an election where 80 seats were available. They briefly had one MP in
1908 when sitting MP in North Leitrim, Charles Dolan, resigned from the Irish Parliamentary Party
and joined Sinn Féin, but he was subsequently defeated in a by-election.
The Irish Republican Brotherhood initially funded the Sinn Féin newspaper with money from Clan na

Gael in America, and for a time their activists campaigned for Sinn Féin in elections. From about 1910
though, coinciding with the growing influence of Tom Clarke and Seán McDermott who favoured
armed insurrection, the organisation became increasingly disillusioned with electoral politics and
instead concentrated on preparing for future armed revolt. Griffith was a member of the IRB, possibly
up until 1910, after which time he generally eschewed the use of physical force for political ends.
Griffith opposed the involvement of Irishmen in the First World War on Britain’s side and his
newspaper was shut down and his printing press seized in late 1914. Griffith and Sinn Féin played no
part in the Easter Rising of 1916 but he was nevertheless arrested after it and imprisoned in Reading
Gaol together with other prominent separatists such as IRB man Ernest Blythe, Sinn Féin activist
Herbert Moore Pim, labour organiser P.T. Daly, and the Cork Volunteer leaders Tomás MacCurtain
and Terence MacSwiney. He was released, however, as part of the general amnesty of prisoners in
December of 1916.
Once released, the veterans of the Rising, together with the pre-war Sinn Féin activists, coalesced
in a new Sinn Féin party that would act as a vehicle for all radical nationalist politics. The new Sinn
Féin had some continuity with Arthur Griffith’s original party in that its principal strategy was to win
elections in Ireland and having done that, to abstain from the Westminster Parliament, declare an Irish
parliament to be in session and to secede from the United Kingdom. However, this Sinn Féin, after
considerable internal debate, declared itself for an Irish Republic. Griffith declared himself agnostic
on the subject of a republic and it was only in October 1917, and at the insistence of Collins, de Valera

and other Rising veterans such as Cathal Brugha and Joseph McGuinness, that Sinn Féin pledged
itself to the pursuit of an Irish Republic.
In 1917, the new Sinn Féin had its first electoral success when Count George Plunkett, father of
Joseph, one of the executed leaders of 1916, won a by-election in Roscommon. Sinn Féin followed this
victory up with two more in Counties Clare and Longford. This was the first in a string of by-election
victories for Sinn Féin. In June 1918, Griffith himself was elected MP for East Cavan. In December
1918 the first general election after the First World War demonstrated that Irish opinion had swayed
dramatically away from the Irish Parliamentary Party and towards Sinn Féin, who won 73 out of 105
seats. Griffith was returned unopposed for East Cavan. He was also elected, as was possible at the
time, for Tyrone North West.
In January 1919, the Sinn Féin MPs met in Dublin’s Mansion House and proclaimed that they had
established an Irish Republic and that this assembly was the Dáil or Parliament of that republic. It
was a stunning vindication for Griffith’s political strategy. Griffith served as acting President of Dáil
Éireann while Eamon de Valera toured America.
Griffith was
known to be uneasy with the
use of violence in the
following years as the
British authorities tried
to suppress the republic
and the Irish Republican
Army or IRA attacked
their police and military in
Ireland. He was involved
in several attempts to end
the violence, conducting
secret negotiations with
the British throughout the
War of Independence.

Firstly, in the summer of 1920, top British civil
servants sent to Ireland, particularly a trio of
Alfred Cope, Warren Fisher and John Anderson,
recommended offering Dominion Status – the
same autonomy enjoyed by Canada and Australia
– to Sinn Féin. Through back channels, they
communicated this to the Irish leadership and it
appears that Arthur Griffith and Michael Collins
viewed this compromise positively. However, the
idea was not accepted at British cabinet level. It
would not be until late 1921 and after a radical
escalation of violence that such a proposal would
be offered in earnest by the British side.
Secondly, in late 1920, secret talks, carried out
via an intermediary between Lloyd George
and Arthur Griffith, had produced the bones of
another peace deal. Griffith presented the terms
to Collins and the Dáil cabinet, who reacted
favourably. A truce was scuppered, however, by
Hamar Greenwood, the hard-line Chief Secretary
for Ireland, who threatened to resign if there was
a truce before the IRA surrendered its weapons.
Griffith was imprisoned in December 1920 but
was subsequently released on 30 June 1921. In
July 1921, after six more months of violence, a
truce was finally reached.

Griffith, Barton and Collins, December 1921.

Negotiations then began on a settlement to the
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)
question of Irish independence. Eamon de Valera
declined to go to London for the negotiations
and instead sent Arthur Griffith as head of the Irish negotiating team, along with Michael Collins,
Eamon Duggan, Charles Gavan Duffy and Robert Barton. Erskine Childers went as secretary to the
delegation. The British refused to countenance an Irish Republic but instead offered an Irish Free State with
dominion status. Northern Ireland (created in 1920) was given a period of a year to opt into or out
of the Free State. The British also insisted that Irish members of parliament would have to take an
oath of allegiance to the British monarch. Griffith advocated accepting the terms on the grounds

that they gave the Irish state enough autonomy in fiscal, legal and military terms on which to build
independence. However, when the negotiating team brought back the terms for the Dáil cabinet’s
perusal, the other members of the cabinet rejected it. De Valera told the negotiators that he might have
been willing to compromise on either Irish unity or on unconditional independence, but ‘you have got
neither this nor that’. The meeting was brought to an end when Griffith proposed that they not sign
the document in London but bring it back for the Dáil to vote on its acceptance.
Back in London on 4 December, Lloyd George told the Irish delegation it was either immediate
signature or war and that he had to know by the next day. Collins and Griffith impressed on Barton,
the last dissenter, that if he did not sign he alone would be responsible for a renewal of war. The Treaty
was signed in the early morning of 6 December 1921.
While many of those who supported the Treaty did so on the basis that it was the best that could be
achieved under the circumstances, Griffith defended it on its merits, arguing that ‘we have brought
back the flag, we have brought back the evacuation of Ireland after 700 years by British troops and the
formation of an Irish Army. We have brought back to Ireland her full rights of fiscal control’.
On the Treaty’s ratification by the Dáil, a Provisional Government, headed by Michael Collins and
Arthur Griffith (who was named President of the Second Dáil), was set up to transfer power from the
British administration to the Irish Free State.
When the Provisional Government and the Treaty settlement were threatened by a hardline anti-Treaty
IRA grouping who had occupied the Four Courts in central Dublin in April 1922, Griffith argued from
the start that they be removed by force. Collins, by contrast tried to conciliate the anti-Treatyites until
late June 1922, when a combination of a desire to assert the authority of the Provisional Government,
British pressure and anti-Treaty provocation forced his hand and he ordered the shelling of the Four
Courts. In the subsequent Civil War between pro and anti-Treaty supporters, Griffith suffered severely
from stress and had to be confined to a nursing home in August 1922. He resumed work as before but
died of what was probably a heart attack (he was suffering from hypertension) on 12 August 1922.
Just over a week later, his close colleague Michael Collins also died, killed in an ambush in County
Cork. Griffith was given a state funeral and later he and Collins (and then Kevin O’Higgins) were
commemorated with a cenotaph in front of the new Irish parliament buildings at Leinster House. It
later fell into poor repair and was pulled down, but was replaced by an obelisk in honour of the two
men in 1956. Wellington Barracks was renamed Griffith Barracks in Arthur Griffith’s honour in late
1922 or early 1923. Today Griffith is remembered as one of the founding fathers of the Irish state.

