The departure of the stationed officers and their families
in 1988, and the transfer of serving personnel to other
Dublin barracks, effectively marked the end of the
day-to-day activity at Griffith Barracks by the Irish Defence
Forces. In the years that followed, most of the buildings were
left completely unused, and with the passing of time, and no
ongoing maintenance, they fell into considerable disrepair.
By 1990, the only remaining use being made of the barracks
was of its medical centre to store archive material relating to
the personal tax returns of Irish citizens. As the information
was organised by county, the inclusion of the former names
King’s County, Queen’s County and Co. Leix provided an
insight into how regularly such information was being
accessed. Without further use for the barracks, the State decided to sell the central 6.7 acres of the site by public
auction on 26th June 1991. Media commentators fully expected it to be acquired by developers for
intensive housing and commercial retail use. Instead it was purchased for conversion to a third level
college by Business and Accounting Training, at a cost of IR£1,750,000 (equivalent to €2,222,500).
The acquisition of the Barracks was reported in the media as a ‘new beginning’, the auction by Fintan
Gunne making RTÉ One’s six o’clock news programme.

The Conference Centre and Halls of Residence

Business and Accounting Training, or BAT as it was better known, was established by Diarmuid
Hegarty in 1974 to prepare students for the professional examinations of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants in Ireland. As a qualified accountant and barrister, working originally from his home,
Diarmuid quickly established a reputation for excellent teaching and the examination successes
achieved by his students.
During the late 1970s and early 1980s, Diarmuid, along with his co-directors Pierce Kent, Roderick
Murphy, Frank Scott-Lennon and a small team of professional staff and lecturers, established the
College’s reputation as the premier provider of training leading to the professional examinations of
the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland (ACA). This achievement was clearly evidenced by
the College’s students taking first place in each of the final and penultimate examinations in 1983.
BAT was then joined by Reg Callanan, the College’s Director of Professional Programmes, who
extended the College’s teaching into other professional accountancy bodies, both nationally with CPA
and internationally with ACCA and CIMA. The College’s rapid growth in numbers was supported by
its move to rented premises initially in Milltown, subsequently in Ranelagh, and later in the acquisition
of its own premises on Morehampton Road, Donnybrook.
By 1990, BAT’s team and range of activities had extended beyond professional accountancy, with
Edmond Holohan managing the delivery of certificate and diploma programmes in computing from
City & Guilds and the National Computing Centre. Tomás Mac Eochagáin then joined the College

as Director of Academic Programmes to introduce the College’s degree programmes, starting with
Computing Science in association with the University of Ulster (UU).
For Diarmuid and his colleagues in BAT, the State’s auctioning of Griffith Barracks in June 1991
presented a unique opportunity. Where countless other buildings for sale in 1991 could have facilitated
the College’s expansion, Griffith Barracks was distinct in having the potential to provide third level
students with a genuine campus experience. The site’s character and ambience offered a vision of an
ideal learning environment not dissimilar to the campuses of Trinity, NUI-Galway and UCC. There
was plenty of space, listed buildings steeped in history, and it was located within and yet apart from
Dublin’s busy city centre.  
Given the long established association of Arthur Griffith with Griffith Barracks, the College felt it
appropriate that the link be continued into the future. Diarmuid Hegarty approached Ita Gray, only
surviving child of Arthur Griffith, to ask her consent for a change of name to Griffith College in
keeping with the naming of the barracks after her father. This request was granted by Ita and her
family, thereby facilitating the transition of Business and Accounting Training to Griffith College
Dublin, or GCD as it was to become better known.

Being able to focus on the potential of the barracks was a necessary key motivation for GCD staff as
they undertook to convert the site for use as a college. In particular, while the new location nominally
offered a five-fold increase in teaching accommodation, many of the buildings were entirely unsuitable
for occupation as the campus had become home in large part to foxes and pigeons. Reflecting on
the move, long-term Griffith faculty member and head of Professional Accountancy, Ann Donegan,
remembered how “the move from Morehampton Road to South Circular Road was both an exciting and
scary leap for the staff at Griffith College as they faced the challenge of developing and modernising
the campus”.
The redevelopment of the College’s existing buildings began in summer 1991. The first building to
be refurbished was a three storey red brick addition built at the time of conversion from prison to
barracks. This was refurbished at a cost of IR£180,000 and was then let to Tiernan Design School. To
retain a link to the past, the building was renamed the Wellington building.
The old barracks medical centre continued to house revenue files for a period after the purchase. This
lasted for about 18 months, during which continued the welcome presence of site security funded by
the Exchequer. On vacation of the building by the Revenue Commissioners, it was converted to rehouse the student restaurant and bar.

Refurbishment of the west block, renamed the Arthur
Griffith Building, commenced in June 1992, with the
firm Mahon McPhillips winning the tender and being
awarded the contract. While plans were initially drawn
up to develop both the west and the north blocks, work
was restricted to the west block as the College, like the
rest of the country, was hit by the credit crunch following
the 1992 currency crisis.
By September 1992, the College began to transfer its
own academic teaching activities from Morehampton
Road to the South Circular Road. The commencement
of activities in the newly refurbished sections of the
College was marked by an opening ceremony, attended
by Ita Gray and her family, at which a bust of Arthur
Griffith was unveiled and mounted in the College’s new
reception area.

Business Expansion Scheme Proposal 1993.

To facilitate further re-development, the College raised
IR£500,000 under the Business Expansion Scheme in April 1993 and a further IR£500,000 one year
later. It also sold its properties on Morehampton Road, Donnybrook, the sale of which had been
delayed by a collapse in property prices associated with the credit crunch. Under Reg Callanan’s
stewardship of the College as Managing Director during the 1990s, the College was enabled to fund
further refurbishment of buildings from operational cash flow.
Work was also carried out on the grounds of the College with the planting of trees and the creation of a
large central grass playing area, replacing the previously austere barracks square. These landscaping
developments provided walkways for students, while also upgrading the College’s electrical, plumbing
and data communications networks to meet its growing needs. Having located their offices in the
College, Conservation Volunteers Ireland developed an urban garden and tree nursery as a training
site on campus. This work was officially launched in April 1993 by the President of Ireland, Mary
Robinson. While much development had yet to be undertaken, the sensitive refurbishment and revitalisation of
historic buildings, along with the landscaping of the campus, showed how new life and function could
be given to a vacated army barracks. The subsequent re-development of Collins’ Barracks into the
National Museum demonstrated another conservation success.
For Griffith College students, the move to the barracks represented a transformation of their College
experience. The hugely increased space available provided freedom for students to meet and socialise,

either through the various sports and social clubs or more generally by participating in the many
social events held in the College’s restaurant and bar. Academic resource developments included the
provision of a professional library service under the care of Robert McKenna and his team, along with
the ongoing development of computer laboratories. This transformation was captured in the College’s
marketing campaign at the time under the slogan ‘College by Name – University by Nature’.
In tandem with the move to the Griffith College Campus and its continued development, the 1990s
marked a period of considerable expansion for the College. It began with the development and growth
of its degree and diploma programmes in Computing Science, Business Studies, and Accounting and
Finance, all of which were validated by the University of Ulster. These programmes attracted a large
cohort of students from Northern Ireland, creating an opportunity for students from all counties in
Ireland to mix and study together towards common goals. For the period up to 1996, Northern Irish
students also benefitted from the direct funding of their programmes by the UK government.
The success and reputation for quality of Griffith’s degree programmes under the auspices of the
University of Ulster demonstrated its unswerving commitment to quality, and in 1992, Seamus
Brennan, TD and Minister for Education, officially approved Griffith College as a designated
institution of the National Council for Educational Awards (NCEA). This led to the College offering a
range of national certificate, national diploma and degree programmes under the auspices of the Irish
Government. These programmes complemented the College’s existing provision extending the range
of programmes into interior design and law.

Further government
recognition of
the College followed in 1999 with the
Department of Enterprise and Employment
funding the fees of students on the
College’s B.Sc. in Computing Science, and
by doing so extending funding for the first
time to an independent college. By the end
of the decade, admission to the College’s
academic programmes was managed
through the national CAO system alongside
programmes from the State’s universities
and other third level institutions.
Throughout the mid-1990s, the College
worked closely with Nottingham Trent
University (NTU). This extended the range
of degree programmes further to include
Irish Law, Business and Law, and International Hospitality Management.
The developing campus on the South Circular Road, with its library, computer laboratories, student
societies, restaurant and bar, attracted the interest of other related organisations resulting in many
temporarily re-locating on campus. These included:
– The Law Society of Ireland, which renovated the top floor of the north block, now called the Daniel
O’Connell building and ran their preparatory programmes in the College for a period of five years.
– Dublin’s Anna Livia, radio station which established their radio broadcasting station on campus
and remained on site for five years
– Brainwave – the Irish Epilepsy Association, which ran programmes for those with epilepsy
integrating them into mainstream third level education
Even more significantly, several organisations came and stayed on campus, often through their
integration with Griffith College. These organisations include:

– The Tiernan Design School which became the College’s Design Faculty
– Newman College’s Journalism School which relocated its programmes in journalism to Griffith
College and began the College’s Journalism and Media Faculty.
– Allied Computer Training and Advanced Technology Training, whose students progressed to
Griffith College following the closure of their organisations in the mid-1990s.
– Dublin International Foundation College, which offers its own suite of foundation and university
preparation programmes to international third level students.
In 1998, the College integrated the Leinster School of Music and Drama (LSMD) as a constituent
school within Griffith College. Established in 1904, the LSMD already had a longstanding tradition
of excellent teaching, along with the preparation of teachers nationwide. It also conducted graded
examinations nationwide, with over 15,000 students taking their examinations annually. Joining the
College brought students of drama, classical and traditional music and opera together with the rest of
an increasingly diverse student body.
Being part of Grifffith College, the development of the LSMD led to the provision of Higher Diploma
programmes in both Music Education and Drama Education along with the recognition of its grades
by Quality and Qualifications, Ireland (QQI). At the same time, it preserved the School’s historic
links with its past through the continued use of its Teacher Diploma Parchments designed by Grace
Plunkett, the Irish artist and cartoonist who was active in the Republican movement, and who married
Joseph Plunkett in Kilmainham Goal only a few hours before he was executed for his part in the 1916
Easter Rising.
By the end of the 1990s, under the marketing direction of Ronan Fenelon, the College had experienced
considerable growth in the number of Irish students attending its courses. From 1994 onwards,
recruitment of international students was to become a key component of the growth of the College.
Students were recruited from as near as Northern Ireland and Norway to as far as China, India and
Pakistan. Indeed, Griffith College was the first higher education institution to recruit directly in China
under the enterprising direction of Leo O’Brien, the College’s International Marketing Director.

21st Century at Griffith College
While the 1990s had focused on the redevelopment of existing barrack buildings, the first years of the
new millennium brought even greater changes to the campus with the development of new facilities
for staff and students.
In June 2000, a modern glass structure known as the link block was completed at a cost of IR£215,000.
This provided direct internal connection between the west and north blocks, now named after Arthur
Griffith and Daniel O’Connell respectively.

The Griffith College Halls of Residence which were built to complement the original buildings.

The College then embarked on its most ambitious development to date - planning, commissioning
and financing the development of purpose built on-campus student accommodation for its students.
In October 2002, the College obtained planning permission on appeal from An Bord Pleanála to
construct two student accommodation blocks providing accommodation for 664 students, permission
having been originally refused by Dublin City Council. In support of the appeal, An Bord Pleanála
received a record number of 38 submissions favouring the development. Demolition of a number
of old buildings started in August 2003 with both blocks completed by March 2005 at a cost of €36
million. Designed by Aidan Powell, architect and built by P.J Hegarty & Sons, the accommodation blocks are
architecturally sympathetic to the original buildings on campus with the added advantage of providing
extensive underground car parking facilities. As the students staying in the Halls of Residence rarely
required parking spaces, the largely unused facility proved a most welcome bonus for the College’s
other full-time and part-time students.
During the construction phase, some of the College’s teaching and administrative activities were
relocated to modular buildings newly acquired from the National College of Ireland as it relocated

from Ranelagh to the city centre. Catering and examination facilities were also provided by the
neighbouring National Stadium.
By the mid-2000s, it was clear that the College needed additional teaching, examining and catering
facilities to meet the needs of its growing Irish and international student body. This led to the
development of the College’s Conference Centre, by the same design and construction teams that
worked on the Halls of Residence. Construction began in March 2005 and was completed in March
2006 at the cost of €15.8 million. As part of the new complex, the College also built a dedicated design
facility. The new buildings were officially opened by An Taoiseach Bertie Ahern on 25th September
This large scale development of modern buildings marked a significant expansion in the College’s
footprint on site. Included in the construction of the Conference Centre building was a 650 seat
auditorium that could be converted readily to accommodate exhibitions, examinations and graduations.
Equally, it allowed for its rearrangement as three large lecture theatres.
Other floors of the building provide conference facilities, additional lecture theatres and administrative
offices. The entire basement floor is used for the College’s restaurant and bar. Following a poll by
students and staff, the new bar and restaurant facility was named Arthur’s, presumably in memory of
Arthur Griffith.
By the late 2000s, the Griffith College student experience had been transformed. The College now
had over 600 students living on campus and a flourishing Students’ Union which ensured strong
student engagement in the College’s societies and sporting clubs. For full-time students, the student
experience went beyond the end of the last lecture at 5pm, as they could now continue to enjoy
the College environs, for social, sporting and, of course, study purposes long into the evening.
Furthermore, the College’s student population had become increasingly enriched and diverse with the
presence of students from up to 60 countries.
Even during the summer months, when many colleges fall quiet, the College and its Halls of Residence
are alive with hundreds of overseas students attending English language summer camp courses with
the College’s English language school. In undertaking such projects the College has been fortunate to
have always had a strong team of qualified accountants on its board to manage the finances involved
under the careful direction of Pat Sheehan, the College’s finance director.
In remarking on the journey undertaken by the College following the completion of the buildings,
Pierce Kent summed up the moves as follows: “From little acorns…! From a basement in Miltown
Park, to a Georgian terrace in Ranelagh, to a former An Óige hostel in Donnybrook, to a bona fide
campus in Griffith Barracks. At last… a facility fitting as a seat of education and learning!”

The development of the College’s buildings could never have been realised without the parallel
successful development of the College’s academic and professional programmes managed by the
College’s heads of faculty, programme directors, lecturers and staff.
As Managing Director since 2000, Tomás Mac Eochagáin guided the further development of the
College’s educational provision and quality assurance systems. In the case of the College’s academic
programmes, this development led to a major strengthening of the academic qualifications and
related research activities of faculty staff resulting in the provision of postgraduate and master’s level
programmes in computing, business, law, media, design and education. This period in the College’s
history also saw a considerable diversification of the core disciplines being delivered to include
photography, fashion, hospitality management, film, sound engineering, digital technology, computer
games and music production.
These developments led to closer links with industry and employers, and enhanced the preparedness
of learners for the workplace, with students regularly winning national and international professional
awards. Further direct links with other organisations were established through the joint development
of accredited programmes with the Irish Small and Medium Enterprise Association (ISME), the
Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Ireland (CPA), Windmill Lane Academy, and Globe
Business College in Munich. The College also established Clarus Press, a legal publishing company
for specialist publications and peer reviewed law journals.
External research projects undertaken during this period included the annual International
Conference for Engaging Pedagogy (ICEP) established under the guiding hand of Fiona O’Riordan,
head of the College’s Centre for Promoting Academic Excellence, and the Innocence Project which
seeks to exonerate victims of miscarriages of justice, established by David Langwallner, Dean of the
College’s Law School.
The period from 2005 on saw the College extend its provision to Cork and Limerick through the
acquisition of Skerry’s Business College in Cork in 2005 and the Mid-West Business Institute, Limerick
in 2006. Both colleges had previously established an excellent reputation for providing third level
programmes under the auspices of the Higher Education and Training Awards Council (HETAC).
Working together, sharing the best of their combined experience, allowed all centres to provide a
wider and improved service to students. From 2006 onwards, the College adopted the name Griffith
College in place of the former Griffith College Dublin.
The 2000s was also a most successful period for the College’s professional programmes with its
centres in Dublin, Cork and Limerick achieving Gold and later Platinum Status with the Association
of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) in respect of their teaching quality. This recognition
was directly reflected in the ongoing national and worldwide prizewinning places achieved by the
College’s students.

Starting in 2004, the Griffith College Distinguished Fellowship and Professional Excellence Awards
were the brainchild of Prof Wallace Ewart former Pro Vice Chancellor of the University of Ulster
and long-time mentor of Griffith College. The Distinguished Fellowship Award was established to
recognise a major contribution at national or international level in the fields of business and public
administration. The College’s Distinguished Fellowship Award holders to date include:
Seamus Heaney, MRIA, Poet and Nobel Laureate
John Hume, KCSG, Nobel Peace Laureate, SDLP Leader, MP and MEP
Mary McAleese, President of Ireland
The Hon. Mrs. Justice Susan Denham, Chief Justice of Ireland
Catherine Day, Secretary General of the EU Commission
Diljit Rana, Baron Rana, MBE, Member of the House of Lords
Peter Sutherland KCMG, SC, Attorney General and EU Commissioner
Denis O’Brien, MBA, Chairman, Communicorp Group Ltd
Martin Naughton, Founder and Chairman, Glen Dimplex Group
Gillian Bowler, Founder Budget Travel and Chairman, Fáilte Ireland
Edward Haughey, Baron Ballyedmond, OBE, Member of Seanad Eireann and the House of Lords,
Founder and Chairman, Norbrook Laboratories Ltd.
The Professional Excellence Award was established to recognise excellent performance in their
chosen profession of recipients of the award. Since its establishment there have been 13 recipients:
Mr Michael Cawley, Deputy Chief Executive, Chief Operating Officer, Ryanair
Dr Martin Newell, Former CEO, Central Applications Office
Mr Terence O’Rourke, Managing Partner, KPMG
Mr Paul Rellis, Managing Director, Microsoft
Fr Peter McVerry SJ, Founder, Peter McVerry Trust for Dublin Homeless
Mr Louis Copeland, Master Tailor
Mr George Hook, Journalist and Broadcaster
Mr Kevin Moran, Gaelic and Soccer Footballer
Mr John Bowman, Journalist, Broadcaster and Historian

Griffith College Distinguished Fellowship Award Recipients

The Hon. Mrs Justice Susan Denham
Chief Justice of Ireland
Distinguished Fellow 2013

Distinguished Fellow 2012

Peter Sutherland KCMG, SC
Attorney General & EU Commissioner
Distinguished Fellow 2011

Catherine Day
Sec. General of the EU Commission
Distinguished Fellow 2010

Diljit Rana, Baron Rana, MBE
Member of House of Lords
Distinguished Fellow 2009

Denis O’Brien, MBA
Chairman, Communicorp Group Ltd
Distinguished Fellow 2008

Seamus Heaney MRIA
Poet & Nobel Laureate

Mary McAleese
President of Ireland
Distinguished Fellow 2007

John Hume, KCSG
Nobel Peace Laureate
Distinguished Fellow 2006

Gillian Bowler
Founder, Budget Travel &
Chairman, Failte Ireland
Distinguished Fellow 2005

Martin Naughton
Founder & Chairman,
Glen Dimplex Group
Distinguished Fellow 2006

Edward Haughey,
Baron Ballyedmond, OBE
Member Seanad Eireann and House of Lords
Founder & Chairman, Norbrook Laboratories
Distinguished Fellow 2004

Mr Frank Ryan, Founder Member of Society for Designers (now the Institute of Designers
in Ireland)
Dr Veronica Dunne, Internationally acclaimed opera singer, Royal Irish Academy of Music and
Leinster School of Music and Drama
Mr Richard Roche, Journalist, Author, Member of Irish Council for the Training of Journalists
and Founder of Griffith College Journalism School
Ms Sheila Murphy, Director, Leinster School of Music and Drama
In 2004, the College’s higher education programmes were placed on Ireland’s National Framework
of Qualifications (NFQ), and subsequently the College had its quality assurance procedures agreed
with HETAC. This led to the constitution of the College’s Academic and Professional Council (APC)
which became the custodian of the College’s standards governing its streams of academic and
professional training activities. In 2008, while maintaining its board of managers, the College adopted
the nomenclature more in common with other academic institutions of president and directors of
function. In 2009, HETAC undertook a comprehensive external review of the entire College encompassing its
academic and administrative procedures. This quality audit commended the College on its Quality
Assurance Procedures and their effectiveness. It also confirmed that for students, the College’s
greatest strength lay in the quality and approachability of its lecturing and administrative team.
Following the review, and in recognition of HETAC’s confidence in the quality of the College’s staff
and procedures, HETAC devolved to the College many of the processes it previously reserved for itself
in relation to the validation and re-validation of its programmes of study.
Recognising the College’s significant presence in the Chinese market, Prof Diarmuid Hegarty in
2012 was awarded an honorary professorship from the Beijing Information, Science and Technology
University in China.
In line with the College’s increasing experience of both international students and quality assurance
systems, it led the development of quality standards for the provision of international education on
behalf of the IHEQN, the Irish Higher Education Quality Network. Established in 2003, the IHEQN
provides a forum for the discussion of quality assurance and quality improvement issues amongst the
principal national stakeholders involved in the quality assurance of higher education and training
in Ireland. Currently chaired by Professor Diarmuid Hegarty of Griffith College, the network’s
members include the Irish Universities Association, Institutes of Technology Ireland, the Department
of Education and Science, the Royal College of Surgeons, Quality and Qualifications Ireland and the
Higher Education Authority.

The Academic Year 2013/14
The commencement of the 2013/14 academic year marks the 40th anniversary of Griffith College.
Since its foundation, the College has grown to become Ireland’s largest private third-level college
with over 7,000 students at its campuses in Dublin, Cork and Limerick. The year also marks Griffith
College’s move to larger campuses in Cork and Limerick.
In delivering the programmes, a total of over 400 specialist and professional staff commit themselves
to the educational and personal development of the College’s learners, to their own development and
that of the College. Of those, almost 200 do so on a full-time basis. Without this team and the support
of external agencies such as the QQI, HEA, NTU, UU and the professional examination bodies, Griffith
College would simply not survive, let alone prosper.

Griffith College Limerick.

Griffith College Cork.

The current profile of the students stands in certain contrast to that of the first classes offered by
Diarmuid Hegarty back in 1974. While continuing to teach professional accountancy along with a
wide range of professional and academic programmes, the College’s courses have expanded further
into new areas to include government funded programmes in digital marketing and cloud computing.
Thanks to the College’s partnerships with over 140 universities and higher education institutions
internationally, it now welcomes students from over 77 countries, further enriching student life for
all. France, Germany, China, India, Norway, the US and Brazil are just some of the main countries
from which the College’s students are drawn. This mix of Irish and international students on campus
has added considerably to the learning experience of all cohorts, providing an experience and
understanding of different cultures invaluable in today’s global economy.

As in previous years, the College continues to nurture successful prizewinning students. While some
will secure such recognition during their years at the College, others will inevitably become famous
in their subsequent careers, perhaps following in the footsteps of recent alumni like the writer Cecila
Ahern, TD Helen McEntee, presenter Laura Whitmore, and journalists Chris Donoghue and Henry
McKean, along with several former past presidents of professional accountancy bodies and CEOs of
multinational companies.
Looking back further into the alumni of Griffith’s constituent colleges, they may even become another
Taoiseach (Jack Lynch – Skerry’s Business College), or Nobel Laureate (Samuel Beckett – Leinster
School of Music and Drama).
To students entering Griffith College in 2013/14, the campus presents a lively sight of optimistic and
talented students from many countries pursuing higher education. Perhaps only a few will ever be
aware of those who shared the same ground before them, as students, soldiers or prisoners during the
200 years of history which are encapsulated within the historic campus.
It will be difficult for new students to recall that hundreds of prisoners were once kept here for minor
crimes, that two men were executed and buried here in unmarked graves in the 19th century, and that
the barracks witnessed violence and bloodshed throughout the Easter Rising, Anglo-Irish War and
more especially in the Civil War, when hundreds of prisoners were again incarcerated in its buildings.
In naming the College’s buildings after Griffith, O’Connell, Meagher, Stephens, Wellington and others,
the College wishes to respect and preserve the campus’ links with its history.
For the most part, it can be expected that students will be busy building their own memories and
creating a continuing history for the College based around their many friendships, the events they
have enjoyed, and the time they spent advancing their careers in the company of others. In doing so, it
is hoped that when they have opportunities to reflect on their own journeys, they will look back fondly
on their experience at Griffith College and regard it as one of the most enjoyable and successful parts
of their lives.

