The Irish Times reported on 12 April 1922: “At 8 o’clock this morning, Wellington barracks Dublin
was taken over by official IRA troops of the 2nd Eastern Division under Commandant T. [Tom]
Ennis.” The Times noted: “There was a complete absence of ceremonial and the formal handing
over of the barracks [by the British Army] attracted little attention”.
Under the terms of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, British troops were being evacuated from the territory
of the new Irish Free State – the handover process began in January 1922 with the handing over of
Beggars Bush barracks in Dublin, but did not get underway in earnest until April of that year. With
all the experience of moving posts across a far flung empire, the British troops moved to their port of
embarkation swiftly and smoothly. Michael Collins was anxious for the British to hand over barracks
and arms to his new Irish administration. Neville Macready, British Commander in Chief, was happy
to hand over Wellington, which by that time was almost empty.
However, the takeover of barracks in general and Wellington in particular was no straightforward
task, for there were by now two antagonistic Irish armed forces on the ground. One of them, loyal to
the Provisional Government set up under the Treaty, was to be called the National Army but in April
1922 when elements of its 1st Eastern Division occupied Wellington Barracks, was still calling itself
the ‘official IRA’.
The other was that element of the IRA which rejected the Treaty and its disestablishment of the Irish
Republic declared in 1919. They termed themselves simply the Irish Republican Army, or Republicans,
but were called by their pro-Treaty opponents the ‘Irregulars’ or ‘Mutineers’. The split between former
comrades in the IRA over the Treaty was deeply bitter and personal, a fact illustrated nowhere better
than in the 3rd Dublin Battalion, based in the south west of the city – the area around Wellington
Barracks. For Padraig O’Connor, for instance, a guerrilla fighter in 3rd Battalion’s active service
unit in the fight against the British, the endorsement of the Treaty by his chief, Michael Collins, was
recommendation enough. He joined the first unit of the National Army, the Dublin Guard, which
paraded in Beggars Bush Barracks, some three kilometres along the Grand Canal from Wellington, in
February 1922.
For Joseph O’Connor (no relation), on the other hand, the commander of the IRA’s 3rd Dublin Battalion,
the Treaty was a betrayal: “I felt that it was wrong to accept any settlement with England for less than
the absolute freedom of our whole country. Now that the Dáil had accepted the new position I deemed
that they had exceeded their powers, and that it was my duty to continue striving until England
withdrew all her forces and we had complete control of our affairs”. He led much of the battalion into
opposition to the Treaty and the Provisional Government in March 1922 when he endorsed a decision
of the IRA Executive to disavow the authority of the Dáil, which had passed the Treaty.
For this reason, the occupation of barracks across the country in the spring of 1922 became a race
between the two sides. At Wellington in particular, Jim Harpur, an officer in the National Army

stationed at Beggars Bush, was told by Tom Ennis, “that Irregular elements were contemplating
having the barracks handed over to them. He instructed me to get a company together and proceed
to Wellington Barracks at 0800 hours. He undertook to inform the British O/C”. The next morning
when the Irish troops marched into the barracks, the British officer commanding duly presented arms,
showed Harpur around the barracks and marched his men out with the band playing. This, however,
was only the start of the new garrison’s problems.

The new garrison of the barracks
The barracks was the depot of the Free State’s Eastern Command under Dan Hogan, a former IRA
commander from Monaghan. It also, from September 1922, housed the Army’s Intelligence Department
under Charles Dalton, brother of Emmet, one of the National Army’s senior commanders. Both
Daltons had worked closely with Michael Collins and his ‘Squad’ in the struggle against the British.
Charles had worked as an intelligence officer and occasionally a gunman too. Several members of his
intelligence unit in Wellington Barracks – such as Joe Dolan and Frank Bolster – had been assassins
in the Squad and were to carry their efficiency at killing into the internecine conflict that followed
the Treaty.

The National Army Intelligence Department was the heir of Michael Collins’s GHQ intelligence
organisation of 1919-1921. A new intelligence organisation was established right after the truce with
the British in July 1921. Liam Tobin, who had been under Collins in GHQ intelligence was made the new
Director of Intelligence, based at Portobello Barracks. In early August 1922, this organisation evolved
into the CID (Criminal Investigation Department), based in Oriel House – a plain clothes, armed,
detective unit. In September 1922, Joe McGrath TD was put in charge of the CID (whose operational
head was Pat Moynihan) and Tobin was re-assigned to a new Army Intelligence Department. Charles
Dalton was made head Intelligence Officer in Dublin, based in Wellington Barracks. The job of the
Intelligence Department was to gather information, launch raids on republican safe houses and arrest
and interrogate suspects. They soon developed a ferocious reputation. Frank Sherwin, a fighter with
the anti-Treatyites wrote: “The Intelligence Officers were a law unto themselves. They were usually
drunk and trigger happy. Wellington Barracks was the worst.”
The regular garrison of Wellington was also tasked with general patrolling in Dublin city, to guard
against anti-Treaty IRA attacks and also to maintain civil order.

Wellington Barracks was also a training depot where new recruits were knocked into shape before
being sent to areas of guerrilla activity elsewhere in the country. Most of the NCOs who were in
charge of this training seem to have been veterans of the British Army and of the First World War. An
orderly sergeant at an inquest in November 1922, for instance, spoke with an English accent, though
he defensively maintained he was an Irishman and said he “was no stranger to machine gun fire” –
indicating he had served in the Great War.
The vast bulk of recruits, however were veterans neither of the British Army nor the IRA. Some were
as young as 16 or 17, recruited for a job, regular wages, meals and a place to live. The overwhelming
majority of them were from Dublin’s working class inner city. The military census of November 1922
recorded 644 officers and men in Wellington Barracks. One page of the census entry for Wellington
gives us an idea of the profile of the National Army soldiers there. Out of nine infantry soldiers listed,
seven were from Dublin city or county. Five were listed as 18 or 19 years old, but may in fact have been
younger, and the oldest was 23.
One of the tragedies of the period was that Wellington Barracks, with its garrison of very young and
mostly inexperienced soldiers, saw considerably more violence during the Civil War than it had in the
preceding War of Independence.

First attacks
Even in April 1922, with the official start of the civil war still months away, things were far from
peaceful. Within days of taking over the barracks, the garrison at Griffith was attacked twice by antiTreaty IRA fighters. An Army statement of April 19, 1922 stated: “men dressed in civilian clothes came
up to the gate and fired point blank at the men in the square”. Two men were wounded. The attackers,
two men carrying automatic pistols, sped away by car, only to be stopped at a roadblock and arrested.
Two days later on April 21, another, more determined attack was made. It was 11.20pm and the troops
were under curfew. Only the sentries at the gates of the barracks were still up. Suddenly fire opened
from the rooftops all around the barracks. The sentries scrambled for cover behind a steam roller and
bullets pinged off the granite bricks. For an hour, the two sides exchanged fire. Two attackers tried to
rush the front gate, throwing grenades at the soldiers inside. They replied with bombs of their own. A
total of five men were wounded in the skirmish.
The context of these attacks was the occupation, by anti-Treaty IRA forces, of the Four Courts in
defiance of the Provisional Government. Attacks were also made in these days on government
buildings, Beggars Bush Barracks and the Bank of Ireland headquarters on College Green. Although

Rory O’Connor, IRA commander in the Four Courts, denied responsibility for the shootings, this
seems unconvincing.
While in the following months, Michael Collins, head of the Provisional Government, made strenuous
efforts to re-unite the republican movement, it was clear that at some point that the government would
have to assert its authority or the Free State would collapse, bringing with it the possibility of British
re-occupation.  Civil War
On June 28, 1922, the undeclared civil war became official when Free State troops opened fire with
artillery on the anti-Treaty forces in the Four Courts. The fighting in Dublin was over within a week,
with pro-Treaty troops securing the capital. Within a month, the original garrison of Wellington
was sent to different parts of the country to break up anti-Treaty resistance, principally to Counties
Wexford, Cork and Kerry. By the end of August, the main towns and cities had all been occupied by
Free State forces but a new phase of the war was about to begin, as the anti-Treaty IRA embarked on
a campaign of guerrilla warfare in the hope of bringing down the Free State.
The victory of the pro-Treaty forces in the fighting of the summer of 1922 came at a terrible cost,
taking the lives of Arthur Griffith, President of the Second Dáil (who died of a stroke) and Michael
Collins, National Army Commander in Chief, who was killed in an ambush in County Cork. Later that
year Wellington Barracks was renamed Griffith Barracks in honour of Arthur Griffith.

Soon the grim ritual of military funerals for members of the garrison killed in action became a familiar
sight in the barracks. Michael Crampton, for example, was only 17 when joined the Army, and was
a native of Church Street in the Liberties. He died in Wexford on 25 July, killed in an ambush while
escorting a train. Another Volunteer, a man named Cuddell, a driver attached to motor transport
in Wellington Barracks, was killed near Fermoy in Cork, with two other soldiers. A mine blew the
Crossley tender he was driving “to fragments” and “the right side of his face was almost blown away”.
In Dublin itself, the garrison of the barracks
found themselves policing a restive
population, without training or guidance.
Some died in accidents, the result of mixing
so many inexperienced youths with loaded
weapons. One such was Francis Denham
(18), who was mistakenly shot by another
Free State soldier while on guard duty at
Harcourt Street train station. Another boy
soldier, Sean Sullivan, a sergeant major
at only 16 years and 10 months, died in
a scuffle while trying to clear a street
outside a pub in the north inner city. His
commanding officer fired a shot over the
heads of a crowd, only for it to ricochet
back off a roof and kill young Sullivan.
All this time, menacing the raw, nervy young
men, was the threat of attack, mostly by the
IRA 3rd Dublin Battalion, former comrades
of some of the garrison. The troops in
Wellington were regularly ambushed with a
sudden volley of shots, or a grenade thrown
at a passing troop lorry. In one incident,
a lorry heading back into Wellington
barracks was ambushed at Curzon Street,
across the South Circular Road. A grenade
flew through the air, only to miss the troops
and land in Williams’ newsagents. Maureen
Carroll, a girl of only seven and another
man, were seriously injured in the ensuing

The YMCA and other buildings on fire.

fire fight. The soldiers bundled out of their lorry and chased the ambushers down the maze of red brick
streets. They caught them on Kevin Street. The troops claimed that the two, Sean McEvoy and John
Hardwood, tried to “bolt”. Both men were shot, and McEvoy killed. The barracks was also harassed
by sniper fire on a nightly basis. On one occasion this resulted in a passerby being killed. Margaret
King, an 18 year old draper’s assistant, was shot dead by an unseen sniper while walking home past
the barracks.
The activities of the republicans were, however, generally minor in scale, often involving destruction of
roads and communications rather than direct attacks on troops. On September 16, 1922, for example,
troops from Wellington Barracks found men dismantling nearby Rialto Bridge with pickaxes and
spades, who fled when fired on. This disruption of everyday life does not appear to have been popular
in Dublin. One anti-Treaty guerrilla, Frank Sherwin, remembered, “most of the people were against
us in the civil war”.

Prisoners Combating the republican guerrillas meant finding out who they were, where their safe-houses were
located and then arresting or killing them. This was primarily the job of Charlie Dalton’s Intelligence
Department. His men, along with regular troops from the barracks, raided known republican safe
houses and arrested hundreds of suspects.

By September 1922, 140 prisoners were
held behind barbed wire in the barracks.
By November, the number was over 250. In
the Dáil, on September 13, 1922, George
Gavan Duffy questioned the Minister for
Home Affairs, Kevin O’Higgins about why
one particular prisoner “Dr. Bastable, of
Glasgow, was arrested on the 8th instant
and imprisoned in Wellington Barracks;
by whose authority, for what reason, and
on what charge Dr. Bastable has been
arrested; and whether the application of
his solicitor, Mr. John Cusack, to visit him
on professional business will be acceded
to”. O’Higgins responded simply that,
“Prisoners arrested in an area in which
hostilities are not definitely ended must
be regarded as military prisoners in the
war zone” and that he had no information
about the man in question.
Prisoners were first taken on entry to
the barracks to the guard room and then
deposited either in cells or in the barracks
gym. Joseph O’Connor, the commander of
the anti-Treaty IRA’s 3rd Dublin Battalion
was captured in late October 1922: “After
some days in the guardroom where were
Kevin O’Higgins, Minister for Home Affairs.
also Pat Sweeney, Michael Price and the
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)
four men captured at Oriel House, I was
sent to the gymnasium, which had been
wired off and made into a collecting cage”. He describes the conditions in the gym: “The conditions in
the Gym were awful, particularly in the mornings after the place had been locked up for twelve hours.
The doctors when appealed to, stated the place should house fifty men and not more”.
Wellington was a holding centre rather than a prison and the typical stay of prisoners there was
7-8 weeks. O’Connor was moved to the much larger internment camp, nicknamed ‘Tintown’ in the
Curragh just before Christmas 1922 and was held there until 1924.

Another prisoner at Wellington in September 1922 was a lawyer, Dermot Crowley, who was arrested
by intelligence officers after he had filed a writ of habeas corpus demanding the release of republican
prisoners. He wrote to his friend and former colleague, Cahir Davitt, the new Attorney General of the
Irish Free State:
From what I have since seen and heard I believe he is one of the body called ‘Intelligence Officers’ – a
body specially created by Mr. [Richard] Mulcahy since he-became Minister for Defence, and apparently
trained after the methods practised by the British Auxiliaries in this country, but with a great deal more
coarseness and savagery than the Auxiliaries were capable of. On arrival here he searched my pockets
and took my cheque book, some private letters I had, and a pocket book containing various things. I
have got back none of these.
I have since been locked up in a filthy cell and have never undressed at night – Thursday to Monday – the
two so-called blankets supplied being unclean. The dimensions of the cell are about nine feet long, seven
wide, and ten in height. The following night (Friday) another person was put in with me.
On Saturday there were five, and last night (Sunday) nine of us in this cell. We have been locked up here
day and night except for fifteen or twenty minutes exercise each day in the yard. I have scarcely eaten
anything since my arrival. The food given to the prisoners in these cells consists of the leavings of the
common soldiers in the guardroom adjoining, who never use a knife or fork themselves.

Disturbing stories soon emerged of the treatment the prisoners in Wellington received. Anti-Treaty
commander Ernie O’Malley wrote a letter to the newspapers complaining that “Commandants Dan
Coughlan and Frank Bolster” had “kicked prisoners senseless” at Wellington Barracks. On Saturday
September 30th, an urgent request was sent to nearby Mount Argus Church for a priest to see a
prisoner, Fergus Murphy. He had been wounded in the head. The priest, Fr. Kieran Farrelly, raced to
the barracks, but troops there told him: “it’s nothing, a minor scalp wound”. Unconvinced, he went
looking for Murphy among the prisoners. Standing at the barbed wire, he found him:
As he drew near, I had a sickening feeling, because I had never before seen a man after torture. His head,
from the eyes and ears upwards, was heavily bandaged. His eyes were blacked and twitching with pain.
His face on both sides of the nose was also black. His right cheek was terribly swollen. I asked him what
had happened him. He motioned to the Intelligence Department and said, “They took me down there last
night and left me as you see me”.

On October 4, T.J. O’Connell TD asked W.T. Cosgrave, now President of the Dáil, about the allegations
of mistreatment of prisoners in Wellington and Fergus Murphy in particular: ”It is a matter of common
knowledge to this Dáil that widespread complaints have been made with regard to the treatment of
prisoners”. Cosgrave responded that the medical officer at Wellington had stated that “’this man came
into the barracks suffering from old wounds. There are no prisoners in the barracks suffering from
the effects of ill-treatment. Now an investigation is taking place in this case, and disciplinary action
will be taken if any charge is proved”.

Dermot Crowley wrote to Cahir Davitt at around the same time telling of the beating of prisoners:
Some of the occupants of this cell and the adjoining one have been frequently interrogated concerning
themselves and other people and savagely assaulted. This is done by the ‘Intelligence Officers’ referred
to. I have witnessed instances of it. Once when I was being interrogated myself another officer intervened
and said: “This is a special case”.
On three separate occasions that night the cell door was opened and the prisoner dragged out and
savagely beaten because he could not or would not give information about other people. On the third
occasion an order was given outside to a number of soldiers to form a firing party and to load. I heard
these orders and the actual loading of the rifles. I heard other appalling expressions likewise. My soul
sickened at the thought that I belonged to a country where such abominations were committed and paid
for by the people.
The prisoner seemed to have been taken out into the yard out of hearing, and about half an hour passed.
Then he was brought back by a different officer who remarked: “Only for me you would have gone west
that time!” The next day in my presence the same prisoner, was subjected to another “interrogation”. A
revolver was put to his face and he was told three times that he would be taken out that night at 12.30
and shot. Two hours later he was taken to an office for further “interrogation”. I was standing at the door
of that office. I heard his moans of pain inside. He came out with his face swollen at both sides. He said
some of his teeth were broken.
An officer accompanied us back to our cell. He seemed sorry for the continued persecution of this man.
I told him of the threat to take the prisoner out that night and shoot him, and asked who was in charge
of the barrack, and why these “Intelligence Officers” were allowed to come in at all hours of the night
to practise such infamies. This officer said: “I am in charge of the barrack, and this man will not be shot
to-night”. He added: “But he was lucky in not being shot as soon as he was arrested”.

Crowley, who was not a member of the IRA, eventually went on hunger strike and was released in
October 1922.

The Dirty War
The officer quoted by Crowley who feared that prisoners were being shot out of hand by the Intelligence
Department was not worrying unnecessarily. On October 6, 1922, Charles Dalton arrested three
youths in Drumcondra who had been putting up republican posters and brought them to the barracks
for questioning. They were interrogated by officers there and then discharged. The following day
their bodies were found at the Red Cow in Clondalkin, shot in the head. Edwin Hughes and Brendan
Holohan were 17. Their friend, Joseph Rogers, was a year younger.
An inquest was held the following month and the prosecution counsel asked for a verdict of murder to
be brought against Dalton. The jury, perhaps afraid of crossing the army, declined. In fact, Dalton was
put under arrest by the CID, a police counter-insurgency unit largely made up of former IRA men, with
an equally grim record as the Army Intelligence Department, but was never charged.

There were complaints from their own side that the intelligence officers were too wedded to raids
rather than intelligence gathering. One intelligence officer, Bryan, complained that they sat around
the office in Wellington waiting for a tip-off so that they could raid, rather than analysing intelligence.
Nevertheless, the Intelligence Department could be effective. They had extensive knowledge of how
the IRA worked in Dublin and other information was, quite simply, battered out of their prisoners.
On November 4, 1922, they captured Ernie O’Malley, commander of the anti-Treaty IRA’s Eastern
Division, in a raid on his safe-house on Aylesbury Road.

The attack on Wellington Barracks, 8 November 1922
Early on the morning of November 8, 1922, the republicans made their most determined attack on
Wellington Barracks during the Civil War. The attack seems to have been part of a general ‘hit-up’
by the republicans in the city. The other military barracks around the city were also attacked in the
same week.
The barracks’ orderly clerk was attending the morning parade where the soldiers, mostly unarmed,
were listening to the order of the day read by the regimental sergeant major, when he heard machine
gun fire. The clerk at first thought it was practice firing. Then he saw spurts of dust spring up from
the ground as the bullets landed around him and flung himself to the ground. Another soldier told The
Irish Times: “I will not forget this morning for some time to come. It was a pretty tight corner to be in.
The first outburst crashed in on us just like a flash of lightning, and did most of the damage. All of us
that could crawled around for cover, it was simply death to walk in the square at that time”.
The republicans had occupied the upper stories and roofs of the houses across the canal, at the back
of the barracks. From there, they raked the parade square with rifle and machine gun fire. The sound
was deafening to the stricken soldiers. One said: “It seemed as if marbles were being rained down
from an immense height”. A total of eighteen soldiers were hit. One was killed instantly and seventeen
badly injured. As the firing started, a butchers van owned by one R. McGurk of Harolds Cross was
making a delivery to the barracks. The storm of bullets peppered the unfortunate delivery men, killing
their horse and mortally wounding the driver. According to a soldier on the scene “the whole thing
lasted about 15 minutes, the rest of the soldiers came out then and started some Lewis guns going.”
One hundred soldiers had been lined up on the square shoulder to shoulder. Given that a large number
of republicans had been involved in the attack, that they had time to set up their targets, which were
around 50 metres away, and given that they were armed with Lee Enfield rifles and Thompson and
Lewis machine guns, it says something about the poor marksmanship of the attackers that more
soldiers were not killed. The republicans made their escape across country, through the villages of
Kimmage and Crumlin, pursued by Free State troops. They were seen carrying two badly wounded
men of their own. The army later claimed the two were killed in the fire-fight.

Reprisals for the attack
Free State troops flooded the area around Wellington Barracks after the attack and ambulances
dashed to and from the hospital with the casualties. Most of the attackers had got away. But in the
aftermath of the attack, the Free State soldiers managed to exact some revenge for the attack. Inside
the barracks, some soldiers opened fire on the prisoners locked inside the gym. Joseph O’Connor
recalled: Whilst there an attack on the barracks took place. It was a good sharp fight, but when it was ended our
turn came. We were crowded into the Gymnasium and the door locked. Some [Free] Staters got outside
the north door with sub-machine guns and fired through the wooden door, but “God directs the bullets”.
A strong inside iron bolt deflected the bullets. Only for this the casualties amongst the 250 prisoners
would have been very great, but as it was, not more than half a dozen were wounded. Seán Forde was
the prisoners’ commandant, and handled the situation well. Pat Sweeney was one of those hit. This was
the most brutal and cowardly act that I ever knew Irishmen to be guilty of.

James Spain, an anti-Treaty fighter who had been wounded in the leg while attacking the barracks,
was spotted in the neighbouring streets trying to find a friendly house. A Mrs Doleman, of 22 Donore
Road, was feeding her chickens, when a young man approached her, wounded in the leg, saying, “For
God’s sake let me in! Jesus Mary and Joseph help me, if they get me they’ll shoot me!” She let him
in, but hot on his heels was a Lancia armoured car with five soldiers in it. They pulled him out of the
house. His body was dumped in nearby Susan Street, shot five times in the chest and head.
In sweeps of the immediate area, the Free State troops picked up another twenty or so Republican
suspects. Among them was Frank Sherwin, a member of the Fianna or IRA youth wing, who was
arrested with arms along with five other youthful guerrillas who had been carrying out attacks in
Dublin, but not, apparently, the one on Wellington Barracks. Sherwin remembered: “We were marched
to Wellington Barracks, about a mile away. Some of the people on the street shouted and jeered at us.
Perhaps they knew some of the soldiers who had been shot that morning”. He was brought into the
office of the Intelligence Department into the custody of Joe Dolan, one of Charles Dalton’s men. He
has left one of the most vivid accounts of the torture of prisoners. Dolan wanted to get the name of
his commanding officer in the Fianna, Charles O’Connor. Sherwin refused to give it, fearing that if he
did O’Connor would be killed. Dolan began to beat him: “My clothes were dragged off me until I was
naked… I was lashed for about twenty minutes”.
The following day they tried again. They hit him in the head with a revolver and poked him with wire.
Dolan jabbed him with a bayonet and stuck a rifle into his mouth. He even produced a razor and
threatened to cut the prisoner’s throat. In the end they decided he wouldn’t talk and threw him back in
with the other prisoners. Sherwin recalled: “My face was swollen, my nose was broken, several teeth

were missing and I had cuts and lumps on my head, with bruises all over my body. I could not stand
or move for nine days”. He was never to fully recover the use of his right arm.

The end of the Civil War
In terms of casualties inflicted, both killed and wounded, the eighteen Free State soldiers hit in the
attack on Wellington on November 8, represented the high point for the anti-Treaty guerrilla campaign
in Dublin. Two days later there were simultaneous, 20 minute attacks on both Wellington and
Portobello barracks, including an attempt to kill National Army commander Richard Mulcahy, who
lived inside the Portobello complex. Two civilians and one IRA man were killed in the attack on
Portobello. A soldier was shot in the head but survived.
On November 24, there was another ‘ineffective’ sniping attack on Wellington that caused no casualties.
In the New Year, on March 29 and May 26, 1923, the republican night attacks put some more bullet
holes in the walls of the barracks but failed to hit anyone. Two more sentries at the barracks were
also shot and killed at close range in separate incidents in March 1923, in what can only be described

as assassinations. The anti-Treaty IRA also tried to assassinate Frank Bolster (one of the intelligence
officers with a bad reputation) at the theatre in March 1923, shooting him but not killing him. For
their part, intelligence officers from the garrison shot a civilian, Hugh Haughton, on Donore Avenue
in March 1923, for having on him a copy of an IRA order to kill TDs.
However, compared to the initial months of the war, casualties in Dublin had dropped steeply – an
indication that the republicans’ campaign in the city was petering out. The anti-Treaty side officially
called off their campaign in May 1923.
The Intelligence Department in Wellington Barracks did not outlast the Civil War. Both Liam Tobin and
Charles Dalton were sidelined in a National Army reorganisation of early 1923. Tobin was made aide
de camp of the Governor General and Dalton was made adjutant of the air service. They complained
afterwards about being kept away from intelligence work. For this reason Dalton and Tobin were
leaders of an attempted mutiny in March 1924 for which they were forced to resign from the Army.
Wellington was renamed Griffith Barracks in late 1922 after Arthur Griffith, the first President of the
Executive Council of the Free State, who had died of a stroke during the Civil War in August 1922. The
Civil War was perhaps the darkest chapter of the barracks’ history. Much blood had been spilt and
much suffering caused there, on both sides. Griffith Barracks, as it was now called, looked uneasily
into its future in an independent Ireland.

