Griffith Barracks emerged from the trauma of the Civil War into a peacetime role as a garrison
for the much reduced Irish Army.

The Aftermath of the Civil War and the 1930s
In the wake of the Civil War, one of the first tasks facing the new government of the Irish Free State was
to cut the size of its army. Out of a total government expenditure in 1923-24 of about £30 million, £10.5
million was spent on the National Army. From a high of 58,000 men during the Civil War, consuming
some 30% of the new state’s expenditure, it was reduced to 14,000 men in 1924, and by the 1930s was
down to fewer than 10,000.
At Griffith Barracks, some special corps, which had been formed for the specific demands of the Civil
War, were disbanded. One such unit was the Railway Protection, Repair and Maintenance Corps, which
was charged with keeping the railways running amid the republican sabotage campaign. They moved
into Griffith on January 12, 1923 and, their work completed, were disbanded in September 1923. The
Intelligence Department, which had such a bad reputation during the Civil War was absorbed into a
smaller, more specialised military intelligence section nicknamed the Second Bureau (later G2).

By November 1923, such was the
peaceful mood prevailing at Griffith that
the Army journal An tÓglach devoted
an extensive report to ‘Hallwe’en
at Griffith Barracks’. There was, it
reported, “a very successful Military
Boxing Tournament followed by a
highly enjoyable concert”. It continued,
“Early in the day, many hands were
involved, under the capable supervision
of Comdt. Farrelly in decorating the
spacious Recreation Hall”. In 1924,
The Irish Times reported on the visit of
the National Army chess team to the
barracks. There does appear to have
been a small scandal at Griffith in 1924,
however, when a commandant, Patrick
Geraghty, was charged at the Dublin
District Court with the embezzlement
of £292 belonging to the laundry fund
at Griffith Barracks.

Still, It was a far cry from November
1922, when the barracks was full of prisoners and bullets had rained down one morning on recruits
at morning parade.
With the Army reduced in size after the Civil War, parts of the complex fell out of military use. Part of
the parade ground was purchased by the Irish Amateur Boxing Association in 1937 (headed by former
National Army general W.R.E. Murphy) and made into what is now the National Stadium.
Other parts were leased out into private hands. In September 1924, the barracks’ married quarters
was rented to Greenmount and Boyne Linen Company of Harold’s Cross, who housed the families of
their workers there. Four blocks of the barracks were used, comprising 40 flats of 3-4 rooms each,
complete with running water and electricity. While the same blocks would in later decades become bywords for the worst type of slum housing in Dublin, in 1924, with over 25,000 families in the city living
in one-room tenements, with no running water or electricity, the accommodation for the workers of
Greenmount and Boyne must have seemed relatively good.
In the inter-war years, the Irish Army’s garrison at Griffith was joined by the Army Corps of Engineers.

The Emergency
In 1938, with the clouds of war looming on the European mainland, a joint Army-Garda gas training
course was held in Griffith in preparation for a possible chemical weapons attack on Dublin by one
of the belligerents.
Just a year later, war did break out with Germany’s invasion of Poland and Britain and France’s
subsequent declaration of war on Germany. However, it was the fall of France in 1940 that brought the
reality of war close to neutral Ireland. Both Germany (looking for a way to attack Britain) and Britain
(being anxious to regain control over the ‘Treaty ports’ of Cork, Berehaven and Lough Swilly which
it had surrendered in 1938) drew up contingency plans for invading independent Ireland (popularly
named Éire rather than the Free State since the 1937 constitution). To respond to these threats, the
Irish Army had to be rapidly and quickly expanded for the duration of the war, or as it was called in
Ireland, the Emergency.
A reserve, the Local Defence Force (LDF) was also established. The strength of the armed forces was
temporarily brought up from about 13,000 in 1940 to some 41,000 for the duration of the war, with
another 88,000 (mostly hastily trained and poorly equipped) men in the LDF. Several units of the
LDF, including a contingent of 200 students from University College Dublin, were based in Griffith
Barracks. The UCD contingent first paraded in Griffith in November 1941.
Effectively, therefore, there was a new ‘Emergency Army’. A new battalion, the 14th, was raised and
based in Griffith Barracks. The 14th was commanded by Colonel Joe Byrne with Commandant Kerins
serving as second in Command. Many of the early recruits were veterans of the War of Independence
and Civil War, who called themselves ‘[19]22 men’. To some extent, across the country, common service
during the Emergency helped to heal the rifts caused by the Civil War, and so it was in Griffith. The
14th Battalion included Joe Dolan, the former IRA Squad man and National Army Intelligence Officer,
who had once been described by one of his enemies as “the worst terrorist in Wellington barracks”.
Dolan had clearly not shed the ways of the gunman. He was described as “wearing his service revolver
slung low on his thigh, he would stroll around the square in a detached manner”, perhaps thinking of
what he had done there during the Civil War.
His former enemy Joseph O’Connor, who had been held in Griffith Barracks during the Civil War, also
served during the Emergency in the Local Defence Force (he was charged with guarding Government
buildings in Merrion Street), as did many other former anti-Treatyites. Whether or not there was ever
a personal reconciliation between Dolan and O’Connor, the fact that they were now wearing the same
uniform did signify that the pain of the internecine conflict of 1922-23 was starting to recede.
Initially equipment was scarce and the soldiers in the 14th Battalion were issued with a mixture of
equipment dating from the Great War, regular Army equipment and whatever else came to hand. The

soldiers were charged with manning posts throughout Dublin each night. One hundred and fifty men,
including detachments at banks, government buildings, the power station at Ringsend and elsewhere
were on duty each night. Up to 1942, soldiers could sometimes have to do 100 hours duty each week.
On occasion this guard duty included mounting a cordon in Seville Place in the north inner city for
men wanted by the Gardaí. The most dangerous moments for Irish neutrality were in late 1940 and
early 1941 when it appeared that a German invasion of Britain was imminent.
Throughout the autumn, winter and spring of 1940-1941, the Irish Army trained and prepared to repel
an invasion from any quarter, whether an attack by British forces from Northern Ireland or a German
airborne invasion in the south. When this did not transpire, the Irish Army was put to work at other
tasks, including cutting turf, more of which was needed as a result of the war-enforced absence of
coal. The soldiers based at Griffith were set to work cutting turf at Timahoe in County Laois and even
won a turf cutting competition in Kildare in 1942. Another task in which they were employed was
dealing with an outbreak of foot and mouth disease in 1941. Soldiers had to shoot the infected cattle
and bury their corpses in trenches.
However, in the absence of foreign invasion, the most challenging work for the Emergency Army at
Griffith proved to be rescue work in the aftermath of a German air raid in 1941.
In the early hours of January 3, 1941 it must have seemed for a moment that the war had come to
Dublin. At 03.55 soldiers in Griffith were awakened by massive explosions as an aircraft dropped
bombs on the South Circular Road, just yards from the perimeter of the barracks. Though the barracks
was not hit, nearby houses were and the soldiers were among those who responded. For the next few
hours they helped to rescue people trapped in the ruins of their houses. In all, 22 people were injured,
none fatally. That night bombs were dropped on five counties in Ireland. In all cases, examination

of the bomb fragments proved that they
had been dropped by German aircraft
which were lost and had dumped their
bomb-loads to lighten the aircraft. The
Army’s official statement read:

Evening Herald, Friday January 3, 1941

At 3:55 a.m. an unidentified aircraft
dropped one bomb in Donore Terrace,
South Circular Road, Dublin and destroyed
two houses, seriously damaged a third and
did slighter damage to the other houses
in the area. Some twenty people were
injured, but none seriously. The battalion
of the Defence Forces stationed at Griffith
Barracks turned out within a few minutes
of the explosion and went to the aid of those
who had been affected by the bombing’.

The Irish government made a formal complaint to Germany about the bombing, which like other
German raids on Ireland are thought to have been mistakes on the part of German pilots. It was a
small taste of war, one that anticipated the tragedy of the North Strand bombing a few months later
on May 31, 1941. Troops from Griffith were mobilised to help victims in the North Strand, where 29
people were killed in the bombing, with 90 injured and 300 houses destroyed or damaged. Almost 400
people were left permanently or temporarily homeless.
Paying tribute to the service of the Emergency volunteers, the Minister for Defence Frank Aiken,
addressing a parade of anti-air raid personnel at Griffith in 1944, told them that their voluntary service
and unity had saved the country in the five disastrous years of war and had helped to preserve the
national policy of neutrality. The 14th Battalion was demobilised at the war’s end. Griffith Barracks
was subsequently occupied by the 5th and 18th Infantry Battalions of the regular army from November
to December 1946, but it then lay unoccupied by the military for several years.
In the meantime, the Labour Court occupied part of the barracks in 1947 as did the Office of Public
Works or OPW from 1946 until 1966.

The barracks from the 1950s to the 1980s
In 1953, Griffith Barracks was reoccupied for military use by a new battalion under Commandant
George Heffernan. With various parts of the complex in daily use by civilians, the normal military
security precautions were compromised, as people going to and from the Labour Court wandered in
and out. At one point Commandant Heffernan closed the gates and refused to let any civilians in until
they could produce proof of their identity – an action that caused a minor sensation at the time. From

this point onwards, a civilian messenger was posted on the gate to escort those making their way to
the arbitration court.
In 1956 the IRA launched what they named ‘Operation Harvest’, better known as the ‘Border Campaign’,
against targets in Northern Ireland. In response, the garrison at Griffith was ordered to send three
reinforced companies to the border area to combat ‘subversive activities’ – in reality trying to impede
the actions of the IRA. The IRA’s campaign had run out of steam by 1961, but after 1969, when conflict
again erupted within Northern Ireland, internal security within the Republic again became a priority.
In 1966, the Irish state commemorated the 50th anniversary of the Easter Rising of 1916. During
Easter Week itself the Barracks, then known as Wellington, had been occupied by small and rather
scared garrison of British troops but had largely been left alone. In 1966 however, what was now
Griffith Barracks was occupied by the Irish Army, which traced its ancestry back to those Volunteers
who had sniped at Wellington in 1916. For the commemoration ceremony of the 1916 rising Colonel
Ned Cusack, on horseback, led the colour guard out of Griffith Barracks on Easter Sunday 1966 to the
parade on O’Connell Street. This troop was presented to the then-President Eamon De Valera, who in
1916 had been a commandant in the Volunteers.
Ned Cusack, who commanded the honour guard, had been transferred to Griffith Barracks in 1958
and in 1959 became the Commander of 20th Battalion FCA. D Company of the FCA, which formed
the honour guard in the parade of 1966. This was an Irish-speaking unit named Pearse Company
and its members were practically all students, mainly from UCD, Clongowes, Newbridge, Belvedere,
O’Connell Schools and De La Salle Churchtown. Cusack later recalled that, “one of the Clongowes
students was John Bruton , a subsequent Taoiseach”.
Of the 1966 parade, Cusack remembered:
The 20th FCA battalion marched out the gate of the barracks down the South Circular Road to Harcourt
Street and Dame Street passing the awaiting throngs in O’Connell Street,saluting the President on the
GPO platform loaded with male and female VIPs and then marching back to Griffith via Camden Street
and the South Circular Road. Tired and weary after a rather extended march.The 20th battalion on the
march consisted of 4 companies of about 120 men in each company – one of these companies conducted
all its military training in Irish. All the battalion troops were Dublin City natives from all strata of society
and I must say it was a great honour to lead such hard working, humorous and loyal young men.
Incidentally, a commentary was broadcast by Miceal O’Hehir as the Army marched past the President at
the GPO. Almost like a match broadcast in Croke Park !

In the 1970s, the Army was again expanded against the background of the Northern Ireland conflict
and Griffith was again full, garrisoned by the 20th Battalion and Motor Corps along with the 2nd AntiAircraft Battery, the 2nd Garrison Military Police Corps, Eastern Command Area Records, and the
Observer Corps.

The last Irish Army parade in
Griffith Barracks on September 15th,
1988. The inspecting officers are
Brigadier General Monahan, General
Officer Commanding of the Eastern
Command, escorted by Comandants
McCann and Whelan and Captain
Hynes, all of the Cavalry Squadron.
(Courtesy of An Cosantóir, ‘Farewell to
Griffith’, September 1988)

The various civilian organisations based in Griffith, including the Labour Court, the Census of
Population staff, the Dumping Body, and the Association of Parents and Friends of Mentally
Handicapped Children, had to be relocated elsewhere, the last leaving in 1976.
The security risk posed to the state was highlighted by a shooting just outside Griffith Barracks on
March 26, 1983. A sentry outside Griffith witnessed the shooting and fatal injuring of a prison officer,
Brian Stack, who was shot by republican paramilitaries as he left the National Boxing Stadium, and
died some months later.

Slums and Housing agitation
In 1962, Dublin Corporation took over some of the buildings at Griffith – the bank block and canteen,
and used them for emergency housing for families from the inner city slums. At this time Dublin had
a critical shortage of social housing and at its old core, a concentration of slum dwellings. Over 6,000
families were thought to live in overcrowded conditions and more lived in condemned buildings.
The following year, the married quarters, which since 1924 had been leased by Greenmount and
Boyne Linen Company for their workers, was also taken over by the corporation for use as emergency
housing. The accommodation at Griffith was to be used as a stop gap while decent housing was built elsewhere
for families who had been living in condemned buildings in the city centre. Indeed, in one case in
1964, a family was housed in Griffith after the building they lived in collapsed altogether. By this
time though, the old married quarters were in a very poor state of repair. What was more it had been

decided that the housing at Griffith would only be used for women and children – their husbands and
fathers would have to look elsewhere.
In 1963, there was a protest at Griffith about the poor conditions faced by the families housed there. In
particular, the people living there objected to the fact that the husbands of families were not allowed to
live in the accommodation. In December 1963, several men scaled the walls of Griffith to try to be with
their families but were ordered out again by plainclothes policemen and officials of the Dublin Health
Authority. In response, three families, the Quinns, the Flynns and the Morris’s (a total of thirteen
people) left the barracks and moved themselves into an abandoned house on nearby Clanbrassil
Street. They alleged that they had been on the housing waiting list for five years.
In 1964, the Minster for Local Government, Neil Blaney, told the Dáil that 89 people were living in
the Corporation-run housing at the Barracks, 23 women, 49 children and 17 men. In 1969, the Dublin
Housing Action Committee were still complaining about the ‘broken families’ in Griffith and claimed
that 14,000 new houses needed to be built in the Dublin Corporation area to clear effectively the inner
city slums.
Nevertheless, it was not until the demands of the Irish Army required the return of the buildings in the
barracks to military use that the last families moved out of Griffith in 1977.
By the late 1980s, the Irish Army decided to consolidate its barracks around the country and to shut
some of its installations. The Army left Griffith in 1988, with the marching-out ceremony, on September
15th 1988, being presided over over by Commandant McCann of the Second Cavalry Squadron who
presented his troops to Brigadier General P Monahan. The Cavalry Squadron moved to Cathal Brugha
Barracks while the FCA units based in Griffith were moved to Cathal Brugha, Collins and McKee
Barracks. The buildings then lay empty for a number of years.

