Arthur Griffith departing for London from
Dun Laoghaire for the Treaty Conference, 1921.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Griffith and De Valera with other
Treaty Plenipotentiaries on board
the boat to England.
(Courtesy of the National
Library of Ireland)

Arthur Griffith chatting to
soldiers and civilians, c. 1922.
(Courtesy of the National
Library of Ireland)

Parliamentary Debates
Criminal Law and Procedure (Ireland) Act
– Arrest of Members – House of Commons
Debate February 9, 1888
Dáil Éireann – Ceisteanna – 13 September,
1922, Military Prisoners.
Dáil Éireann – Volume 1 – 04 October, 1922,
Treatment of Prisoners.

Aerial view of Griffith College as it is today.

Directors of Griffith College,
Pierce Kent, Professor Diarmuid
Hegarty and Reg Callanan
pictured after the purchase
of the barracks.

From left: Lord Mayor Gay Mitchell,
Shane Gray, Grandson of Arthur
Griffith, Ita Gray, Daughter of Arthur
Griffith and Diarmuid Hegarty
President of Griffith College on the
occasion of the announcement of the
Griffith Scholarships on the 12th of
August 1992.

View of the campus college green, c. 2000.

President Mary Robinson
officially launching the
Conservation Volunteer Ireland
Urban Project at Griffith
College in April 1993.
(Image courtesy of the Irish
Farmers Journal)

Former Griffith Barracks personnel meet with
Prof. Diarmuid Hegarty on a visit to the campus in
May 1995. Pictured (l-r): Prof. Diarmuid Hegarty,
Cpl Thomas Kenny, Sgt John Griffin,
Tpr Liam Dunne and Tpr Gerry Murdiff.
(Courtesy of An Cosantóir, Military Archives,
Department of Defence)

View of bomb damage on the South Circular Road, January 1941,
taken from behind the Griffith Barracks’ railings.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

The Irish Army parades in 1933 for the Papal Nuncio’s visit. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Belongings loaded on a cart, the South Circular Road, January 1941.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Aftermath of the North Strand Bombings, 1941 – troops from Griffith were used in the rescue operation.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

1916 Jubilee Commemorations – parade and ceremonies at the General Post Office, Dublin. President Eamon de Valera,
accompanied by Commandant Daniel O’Connell, inspects the Guard of Honour at the G.P.O. prior to the Military Parade.
The Guard of Honour was furnished by the 20th Infantry Battalion from Griffith Barracks which were led from the barracks
to O’Connell Street by Col. Ned Cusack. (Courtesy of the Irish Photo Archive)

Alongside the regulars was a battalion of reserves or Forsa Cosanta Aituil (FCA) troops. The FCA had
previously been ‘shadows’ of regular battalions, but from 1979 had autonomous units of their own.
The reserves, among them future President of Griffith College Diarmuid Hegarty, then had a small
cadre of regulars who provided training and leadership, while the part-time soldiers had one training
day per week at the barracks and one all day training day per month.

Free State officers in front of armoured cars.
Centre in the front row is Tom Ennis, who commanded
the National Army takeover of Wellington Barracks.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

British troops being replaced by National Army troops at Richmond Barracks in 1922. Similar scenes took place at Wellington
Barracks in April 1922. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Free State or National Army soldiers parade in Wellington Barracks, in front of the guardhouse in 1922.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Recruits for the National Army enter Wellington Barracks, 1922. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Artillery outside the Four Courts. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Civil War in Dublin – troops at Nelson’s Pillar. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Buildings burning at the north end of O’Connell Street, July 1922. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Crowds gather outside the barracks after the attack. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Left: Griffith College – aerial view from 1991.

Drawing of Daniel O’Connell and the Repeal Martyrs’
release and procession from The Richmond Bridewell, 1844.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

An Ordnance Survey
map of 1837 shows the
Richmond Bridewell.
(Ordnance Survey Ireland
Government of Ireland)

A fragment of the original drawings by the architect Francis Johnston, dated 1813. (Courtesy of the Irish Architectural Archive)
Inset: a commemorative coin with the profile of Francis Johnston. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Above: Daniel O’Connell.
Right: “Richmond Bridewell,
late prison of O’Connell and
the Repeal Martyrs”, from
The Freeman’s Journal.
(Courtesy of the National Library
of Ireland)

Daniel O’Connell addressing crowds from the balcony of his home in
Merrion Square following his release from The Richmond Bridewell, 6
September 1844. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Above: view of Richmond Bridewell and, below, the Dining Room, as drawn by Henry O’Neill R.H.A. 1844.
(Courtesy of the Christian Brothers, Edmund Rice House)

Above: the Liberator’s bedroom and, below, John O’Connell’s bedroom, Richmond Bridewell, as drawn by Henry O’Neill
R.H.A. 1844. Both rooms display an opulence not usually accorded an inmate of the prison.
(Courtesy of the Christian Brothers, Edmund Rice House)

(Courtesy of the National Archives)

receive guests and his dinner table was never set for less than 30 people. He even became infatuated
with one visitor, the 23 year old Rose McDowell (daughter of a political ally), whom the 68 year old
O’Connell asked to marry him (she refused).
In September 1844, O’Connell’s conviction was struck down in the House of Lords due to the jury
having been improperly selected. He was freed on September 5, 1844, whereupon hundreds of his
jubilant supporters descended on the Richmond Bridewell in celebration. O’Connell, ever the master
of political street theatre, returned to the prison from his home in Merrion Square that evening for
a formal procession home, where his release could be openly celebrated by thousands of Repealers.

Famine in Ireland 1845-48. The Richmond Bridewell was filled to twice its capacity
during the Famine. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Wellington Barracks with soldier on guard duty, c.1900.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

Wellington Barracks, plan/elevations c. 1900. (Courtesy of Military Archives, Department of Defence)

Inside Wellington Barracks, with soldiers on horseback c.1900. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

British Army Parade in Dublin. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

The Great War
However, the relatively sedate life of the troops garrisoned at Wellington was shattered by the
outbreak of the First World War in August 1914. The day after Britain’s declaration of war, on August
5 1914, The Irish Times reported that, “The Commanding Officer of the 1st battalion, City of Dublin
Cadets requests all cadets and ex-cadets of the force to parade in Wellington Barracks at 8 o’clock this
evening with a view of enrolling for garrison duty or active service if necessary.”
Within weeks, the regiments of the regular British Army had been deployed to the front in France
and Belgium. The 1st Battalion of the East Surrey regiment, which had been stationed in Wellington,
joined the 14th Brigade of the 5th Division of the British Expeditionary Force. The East Surreys landed

Recruiting posters for the First
World War: ‘Be one of the 300,000’ –
Wellington Barracks was a recruiting
depot during the War.
‘Your First duty is to play your part in
ending the war’, John Redmond, 1915.
(Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

The other was Thomas Young, who was ordered to scout the area of the South Circular Road for troop
movements: I was further ordered to take my party to a position where I could command a view of the gates of
Wellington Barracks, so that I could prevent any troops in numbers leaving the Barracks. I was to
maintain this position until twelve o’clock noon, when I could withdraw. I took up a position at the
junction of Wellington St. and Wolsely Street where I had a fair view of the main gate of Wellington
Barracks. No British military came out from the Barracks. I withdrew at twelve o’clock and returned to
Emerald Square, but found no Volunteers there. I proceeded down Marrowbone Lane.

Easter Rising: the GPO in ruins. Inset: Con Colbert, the Volunteer officer, who ordered
Wellington to be scouted on the outbreak of the Rising. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

The burnt out shell of the Linen Hall Barracks. Wellington was not directly attacked but was harassed by sniper fire
during the Rising. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

It says much about the laxity of security in the barracks at the time that not only was Handley not
caught and punished, he was subsequently transferred as storeman to military posts at the North Wall,
near Dublin Port and Kingstown (now Dun Laoghaire) where he clandestinely supplied more arms
from embarking and disembarking soldiers to his contact in the Citizen Army.
However, the incident meant that, according to a member of the Leinster Regiment: “command
decided they couldn’t trust the Irish regiments. They brought over an English regiment to replace
each Irish unit and we were put back on the boats that they came over on”.

A civilian, or IRA member, killed after the IRA raid on the Customs House in May 1921. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

We took up a position in a field near Rialto Bridge, which was the property of Alderman Flanagan. We
lay behind a stone wall and waited until the patrol came into view and within revolver range.
Jimmy McGuinness was in charge and he ordered us to open fire on them, which we did. Evidently the
party were taken completely by surprise as they seemed to run amok and did not return the fire. I cannot
say if we caused any casualties amongst them.

Another 3rd Battalion IRA guerrilla, Padraig O’Connor, was involved in ambushing a car load of
intelligence officers (known to the IRA as the ‘Igoe Gang’) in Dolphin’s Barn on their way to Wellington
Barracks on June 30, 1921. Ten IRA men fired on the car in the square in Dolphin’s Barn. O’Connor
recalled: One officer in the back was returning the fire all the time. Our party at the Laundry opened fire on the
car when it came abreast of their position, but the driver brought the car to Wellington Barracks. Most of
the occupants of the car were either killed or wounded. The return fire from the car wounded one civilian
who was passing at the time. Our party got away safely.

‘Good Bye Dublin’: British troops prepare to be shipped out of Dublin. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)

The building pictured in
this watercolour by Aidan
Powell was the barracks’
medical centre. It was
later used by the Revenue
Commissioners to store
tax files.

