Introduction  As President of Griffith College it is my honour to
welcome you to this book which commemorates
the 200th anniversary of the historic buildings on
the Griffith College Dublin campus.
As this book outlines, the campus has a varied history. The
area was originally known as Grimswood’s Nurseries. In
1813 construction began on a remand prison, subsequently
known as the Richmond Bridewell, designed to relieve
pressure on Newgate Prison. The prison went on to house
famous Irish patriots including Daniel O’Connell, James
Stephens, Tom Steele and Thomas Francis Meagher.
Prisoners from the 1916 Easter Rising were temporarily
held in the jail which was then under control of the War
Department. During the Civil War the barracks came under attack a number of times.
Once Ireland had gained independence the site continued to be used as a barracks
and was one of the first to be returned to Irish control. The buildings were also used
by the Irish Amateur Boxing Association and housed the first unit of the ‘Emergency
Army’. The Office of Public Works and the Labour Court were both located at this site
at different stages until it was sold in 1991 and became Griffith College Dublin.
Since becoming Griffith College Dublin we have sought to combine the rich history
of the buildings that surround us with the academic objectives of the College. The site
has seen significant investment with student accommodation and a conference centre
complementing the original buildings.
In keeping with the history of the site, the campus retains multiple functions with
various voluntary bodies utilising the facilities along with other organisations. Now, as
Ireland’s largest private college with 7,000 students from Ireland and across the world,
the campus acts as a centre of the community.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank John Dorney and Matthew Foyle for
their work in putting this book together and in locating images, and to Pat McCarthy
and Brian Maye whose expert advice has supported their endeavours throughout
this work.
Finally this year, as we celebrate our 40th Anniversary as an academic institution
surrounded by 200 years of heritage, we look forward to developing both as a core of
the community and as a centre of education.
Ó bunaíodh an Coláiste rinne muid iarracht go mheabhrú agus a cheiliúradh ár stair
agus a fhorbairt i gcónaí le haghaidh ár todhchaí.

Professor Diarmuid Hegarty
President of Griffith College Dublin

