In the early part of the 19th century the site at what is now Griffith College was used by the Grimwood
family as a nursery. For most of the 19th century, however, the site on the South Circular Road was
a prison named the Richmond Bridewell. It was designed by the architect Francis Johnston, who
also designed the General Post Office, Nelson’s Pillar, and part of the Vice-Regal Lodge in the Phoenix
Park (now Áras an Uachtaráin) and the interiors of the Custom House. The Richmond Bridewell was
built to relieve pressure on the overcrowded Newgate Prison in Dublin.
Construction began in 1811 and continued until 1816, but the new prison was opened in 1813. The
initial construction of the buildings cost the city government some £42,000, a very considerable
outlay in those times. Cease to do evil; learn to do well was the motto over the door of the Richmond
Bridewell, leading to the satirical popular nickname for the prison, the ‘Cease to Do Evil Hotel’.
Conditions in the early years of the Richmond Bridewell were often brutal. A report of 1827, conducted
initially to investigate charges of Protestant proselytizing of Catholic prisoners, revealed a disturbing
series of cruel punishments. It found that the following ‘cruelties’ had been proved; confining prisoners
in a piggery day and night, handcuffing, depriving prisoners of blankets, the use of stocks in cold

weather, confining prisoners in a ‘cage’ in winter, keeping prisoners on a diet of bread and water as a
punishment, gagging, chaining wrists to ankles, use of the ‘iron helmet’ (a metal device which fitted
tightly around the head and face) and ‘strait waistcoats’ (straitjackets) .
In 1835 a solitary prison building, where prisoners would be confined for bad behaviour, was
constructed at the Bridewell at a cost of £8,000. Dublin city borrowed the sum from lenders in Britain
and did not pay it back until 1884.
The following year, 1836, another 114 cells were constructed for the main prison at the site at a cost
of a further £4,000. Heating by ‘hot water ducts’ was added in 1837.
The Richmond Bridewell was described in 1837 in the Topographical Dictionary of Ireland as:
The Richmond Bridewell, on the Circular Road, erected by the city at an expense of £40,000, is a spacious
structure enclosed by walls flanked with towers at the angles, and is entered by a massive gateway;
between the outer wall and the main building is a wide space, intended for a rope-walk; the interior
consists of two spacious quadrangles, the sides of which are all occupied by buildings; the cells, which
are on the first floor, open into corridors with entrances at each end; the rooms in the second floor are
used as work-rooms; the male and female prisoners occupy distinct portions of the prison; the prisoners
not sentenced to the tread-mill are employed in profitable labour, and a portion of their earnings is paid
to them on their discharge; they are visited by a Protestant and a R. C. chaplain, a physician, surgeon,
and apothecary.

The accommodation must not have been above criticism, however. In 1838, further work was done,
‘rendering the Richmond Bridewell safe for prisoners’, while in 1841 there was further building work
at the site at a cost of over £6,000.

Daniel O’Connell’s stay in the Richmond Bridewell
A very far cry from the lot of the ordinary inmate in the prison was the experience there of the
nationalist leader Daniel O’Connell, who was held in the Bridewell for three months in 1844. He
was arrested after his proposed ‘Monster Meeting’ at Clontarf in favour of the repeal of the Act of
Union or Irish self-government was declared illegal. On the night of Saturday, October 7, 1843, a
proclamation was issued from Dublin Castle banning the meeting, written by the Prime Minister of
Britain and Ireland, Sir Robert Peel. It called the proposed meeting for the restoration of the Irish
Parliament, abolished in 1801, “an attempt to overthrow the constitution of the British Empire as by
law established”.
O’Connell was charged with, ‘conspiracy to raise and create discontent and disaffection among the
Queen’s subjects’, and a number of other counts to the effect that he had desired to dissolve the

Union between Britain and Ireland and
to establish an alternative judiciary in
Ireland. He was tried in early 1844 before
a jury that he alleged was ‘packed’ with
Protestants and unionists. O’Connell
maintained he had merely pursued
legitimate political goals by open and
legal means but was nevertheless found
guilty of conspiracy and in March of
that year he was sentenced to twelve
months imprisonment. An angry mob of
O’Connellite supporters barracked the
carriage that took their leader from the
Four Courts to the Richmond Bridewell.
O’Connell’s stay there was, however,
much more comfortable than that of
most ordinary prisoners. He and his
supporters who had been imprisoned
(including his son John and right-handman ‘Honest’ Tom Steele) were housed
in rooms in the Governor’s suite,
which was described as, ‘a pleasant
country house, situated in the middle
of extensive grounds, bright with fair
women and the gambols of children,
with abundant means either for study or
amusement’. The reason for their comfortable
accommodation was that the prison was
under the control of Dublin Corporation,
a body dominated by O’Connell’s
supporters, who just three years earlier
had elected him Lord Mayor of the city.
They instructed that special care and
attention be given to, ‘our illustrious
countryman’. O’Connell was free to

Section of the Register from the Richmond Bridewell 1845-1849.

The Famine
Not long after O’Connell’s dramatic release from the Richmond Bridewell, Ireland was afflicted by
perhaps the greatest human catastrophe in its history, the Great Famine which killed some one million
people between 1845 and 1848, mostly in the rural west and south of the country.
In Dublin, where the poor generally lived on bread rather than potatoes, the results of the Famine
were more indirect. While the population of Ireland fell by as much as 1.5 million in the Famine years,
the population of Dublin actually increased from 232,726 in 1841 to 258,361 in 1851, as refugees from
the hungry provinces descended on the capital.
Workhouses and prisons such
as the Richmond Bridewell
became crammed
with desperate, starving people –
in the former seeking the only
form of state aid available and
in the latter for petty crimes
such as theft. Indeed, there
were several organised attacks
on bread shops by ‘country
people’ fleeing the Famine.
Whereas in 1845 there were
only 627 people in custody in
all of Ireland, in 1853 there
were over 4,000.

It was recorded that the
Liberties district, just north of
the Richmond Bridewell, was
‘crowded with fever stricken

strangers from different parts of the country, especially Mayo, Galway and other western counties’.
Mainly as a result of the spread of contagious diseases caused by the Famine refugees, burials rose by
some 20% in Dublin during the Famine and there were an estimated 20,000 excess deaths in the Irish
capital between 1841 and 1851. The prison records show a total of 154 deaths occurring in the prison
from 1845 – 1849.
The Richmond Bridewell in 1858 was reported to have housed 60 men and 41 women. They were
generally low risk prisoners, described in the language of the time as, ‘debtors, criminals, drunkards
and lunatics’.
The type of inmate typically imprisoned in the Richmond Bridewell is illustrated by a court report from
The Irish Times of May 5, 1859. A young man, named James Daly, who had two previous convictions
for larceny, was convicted of stealing a brass bar from a tea shop in South Great George’s Street. His
father, described in the press report as ‘a respectable hard working tradesman’, pleaded for ‘merciful
treatment’. The unimpressed judge, however, sentenced James Daly to three months imprisonment in
the Richmond Bridewell and recommended he be sent to a reformatory when he got out.
Discipline inside the Richmond Bridewell was strict. In 1859 it was noted that eleven prisoners were
sentenced to solitary confinement and two to whipping. The other prisoners had to do work such
as picking oakum (a form of tarred fibre used in shipbuilding) or, for special punishment, walking on
treadmills.  The Fenian Era
O’Connell was not the last Irish nationalist leader to be held in the Richmond Bridewell. Other prominent
nationalists imprisoned there included leaders such as William Smith O’Brien and Thomas Francis
Meagher, who were held there for their part in the abortive 1848 Young Ireland rebellion, a poorly planned
episode that occurred at the tail end of the Great Famine. Meagher unveiled the Irish tricolour of green
white and orange in March 1848 in his native Waterford – a gift from French republicans. The flag was later
adopted as the symbol of the Irish Republic after 1916. Both men were sentenced to death and imprisoned
in the Richmond Bridewell in 1849 (like O’Connell they were held in the Governor’s Residence),
but were reprieved due to a public outcry and sentenced instead to transportation to Australia.
Meagher later made his way to America where he led an Irish brigade in the American Civil War. After
the Civil War had ended, Meagher became acting Governor of Montana.
The most famous Irish nationalist activist imprisoned in the Richmond Bridewell in the post Famine
era, however, was the Fenian leader James Stephens. Stephens, who had been wounded in the illfated insurrection of 1848, founded the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) or Fenian Brotherhood in
1858, which was dedicated to the pursuit by any means necessary of an independent Irish republic. In
1865, government officials raided the IRB headquarters in Dublin, housed in the office of the Fenian
newspaper the Irish People. Most of the leaders were arrested, convicted of treason and felony, and

sentenced to penal servitude. Stephens avoided immediate
arrest but was picked up and charged with conspiracy and
high treason and was imprisoned in the Richmond Bridewell.
However, on November 5th, 1865, a distressed Daniel Ryan,
Superintendent of the Dublin Metropolitan Police, wrote to
his superiors: “I beg to state that at 5.20 o’clock this morning
a constable of E. Division stated at G. Division office that Mr.
Marquess, Governor of the Richmond Bridewell, directed
him to call and say that James Stephens, who was confined
there on a charge of high treason, had made his escape”.

James Stephens, Fenian leader.

Security in the Richmond Bridewell seems to have been
rather lax. Stephens had been able to open his cell and then,
by stacking two tables one on top of the other, to have simply
climbed over the boundary wall. To do this he had to open
seven locked doors, which he had done by means of what
the police described as ‘false keys’. It seemed certain to the
investigating authorities, therefore, that Stephens had some
help from prison staff in his escape and indeed he did. Daniel
Byrne and John Breslin, who were members of the prison
staff and also Fenians, had a replica key made for Stephens
and stacked the tables near the prison wall so that he could
make good his escape.

Stephens subsequently fled to France and then to America. His escape made world headlines in 1865,
including the front page of Harper’s Weekly in America. The New York Times, for its part, reported:
Our Dublin correspondent, in his letter of last night, says: “The Richmond Bridewell, from which the
Fenian chief, JAMES STEPHENS, has escaped ... is situated upon the Circular road, an avenue that
almost surrounds the City of Dublin.... It is not the best protected of the Dublin prisons, and it is remarked
that if STEPHENS had been placed in Kilmainham he could not have got off...
A reward for the apprehension of STEPHENS of £1,000 will, I understand, be offered by the Executive tonight, and also one of £300 for the apprehension of the person or persons who aided his escape, or such
information as will fasten the guilt upon them. All sorts of rumors of an absurd character are of course
afloat; one has got many to credit it, that a strange steamer has been lying off shore in the bay, awaiting
STEPHENS, which, it need hardly be said, is quite impossible. According to another rumor, STEPHENS
was met and carried off when he crossed the prison wall, by a hundred or more armed Fenian Brothers.

Stephens’ escape became a well-known story among Dubliners thereafter. Joseph O’Connor, an IRA
prisoner in what was then Griffith Barracks in 1922, recalled:

Harper’s Weekly front
cover, 7th April 1866.
Caption reads:
‘Richmond Bridewell,
Dublin, from which
head-centre Stephens escaped.’

While a prisoner in Griffith I got my last sight of my father. He was looking through the main gate, hoping
to catch a glimpse of me. We saw each other then for the last time on earth. When I was a boy he had
pointed out to me the cell in the same building he occupied during Fenian times, and then he would show
me where he was posted when James Stephens, the Fenian Leader, escaped from the same prison.

Stephens was not, however, the only Fenian to be held in the Richmond Bridewell. After the failed
uprising which the organisation attempted in 1867, several were imprisoned at the Richmond
Bridewell. They found conditions there, which were made stricter after Stephens’ embarrassing
escape, harsh, and certainly a far cry from those experienced by Daniel O’Connell. According to one
account, “Lumped together with other inmates, the Fenian prisoners found that they were obliged to
sleep on hard plank beds rather than hammocks and they were introduced to mindless, repetitive tasks
such as oakum picking and walking on treadmills”. Another distinguished inmate in the Richmond
Bridewell was the Lord Mayor of Dublin, Timothy Daniel Sullivan, who was imprisoned there for two
months for publishing The Nation, an Irish nationalist newspaper, in 1887.

The Richmond Bridewell in 1870
In 1877, when the British Government established a General Prisons Board in Ireland to centralise
the organisation of all gaols and prisons, the convict population in all of Ireland was 4,000 men and
women, divided amongst 38 county prisons, 96 bridewells like Richmond, and four convict prisons.
What was daily life like in the Richmond Bridewell? A look at an inspector’s report of 1870 gives us
some insights.
A statutory inspection on December 19, 1870 found that Richmond housed 245 adult male prisoners (by
this time female prisoners were not housed in Richmond, being all accommodated in Grangegorman)
along with twelve juveniles. The total was an increase on the previous year, but remained within
the norm for Richmond’s convict population in the 1860s, which hovered between 200 and 250
throughout the decade. Of those in Richmond in late 1870, 23 were awaiting trial and eleven were
military prisoners, having been tried by courts martial. Of the remainder, 48 were there for some form
of larceny or theft, 44 for ‘other misdemeanours’, eight in default of bail, seventeen for non-payment
of fines, one under the Poor Law Act and five were ‘drunkards’.
A handful of inmates had committed serious crimes such as manslaughter or illegal stockpiling of
weapons (presumably Fenian activists) but the great majority were there for either theft, common
assault or drunkenness. Many of these were serving short sentences. In 1870, a total of 3,296 prisoners
were committed to Richmond, but only 245 were there on the day of inspection, meaning that most
served only a short period inside the gaol. In 1870 the highest number in Richmond on any given
day was 341 on July 26. Only 45 prisoners out of 245 present on the day of inspection were serving
sentences of a year or over.
Most prisoners were housed in cells with two other inmates. The heating system was described as
‘imperfect’ but there was, apparently ‘ample water’, and inmates could have a bath twice a month.
Generally, however, they washed in sheds in the yard. Gas heated the cells until 7:30 pm in winter
time. They were paraded for breakfast at 8.00 am and locked back in their cells at 6.00 pm. In between
they performed hard labour and other tasks involved in the running of the prison such as cooking and
cleaning. The inspectors reported that security had improved since Stephens’s escape five years earlier and that
‘discipline is very efficiently maintained’. Photographs were taken of some inmates, especially repeat
offenders, ‘professional thieves and the criminal class’.
Infractions on the part of prisoners were still punished by time on the treadmill, solitary confinement
and punitive labour. Prisoners’ food was also stopped on occasion, but whipping, noted in the 1860
report, appears to have stopped by this date. Some 29 prisoners attended school regularly.

After 1868, the Richmond Bridewell became a site of execution. In 1868, the law was changed so
that executions were no longer performed in public. The first private execution in Dublin, after the
passing of the 1868 Act, was of one Andrew Carr on July 28, 1870 in the Richmond Bridewell. He was
an army pensioner who voluntarily confessed to cutting the throat of his girlfriend during a drunken
argument. Present at his execution were thirteen newspaper reporters, three Catholic priests and
three ‘medical gentlemen’. The governor was uneasy about the hangman (like Carr an ex-soldier)
who was inexperienced at his grim new job. He decided on a drop of fourteen feet for the prisoner
despite advice from the surgeon that eight feet would suffice. At the drop, Andrew Carr’s head was
ripped from his body. According to The Irish Times, “the head sprang off from the body against the
wall, blood spouted and spattered all around and the trunk fell into a pool of it on the ground. The
body quivered slightly for about three minutes after the execution”.
A December 1870 report concluded: “the lamentable occurrence at the execution of Carr was caused
by the want in elasticity of the rope”.

The execution of Joseph Poole
Executions were relatively rare in late 19th century Dublin, but the
Richmond Bridewell did witness one more, very high profile hanging. In
late 1883, it was the scene of the execution of Joseph Poole, a member
of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. He was executed at a time when
Fenian political violence was causing both outrage and fear among the
political establishment in Ireland. The Invincibles, a militant Fenian
grouping, assassinated the two leading members of the British
administration in Ireland, the Chief Secretary for Ireland, Frederick
Cavendish and the Under Secretary for Ireland, Thomas Henry Burke, in
the Phoenix Park on May 6, 1882. Five Invincibles were later hanged for
this crime.
Joseph Poole.

Poole was, a rank and file member of the Fenians in Dublin. He was
(Courtesy of Robert Delaney)
sworn into the IRB in 1873, aged just 18 and worked for most of his life as
a tailor. By 1882 he was also armourer (or quartermaster) for a Fenian circle or cell. He was arrested
in July 1882 and charged with the killing of John Kenny, a Fenian and an alleged police informer, who
was suspected of giving away the Invincibles. It was alleged that Poole was a member of a Fenian
group known as the ‘Vigilance Committee’, which was tasked with eliminating informers, though he
denied this. Poole admitted drinking with Kenny on the night of his death but denied any part in his
murder. However, a witness at Poole’s trial (a roommate of his) later alleged that Poole returned to his
lodgings that night saying, ‘Kenny will tell no more’. He was released for lack of evidence.

Poole was rearrested in December 1882 and charged again with Kenny’s murder.  It was believed
that the Dublin Metropolitan Police (DMP) sought the death penalty as they suspected that Poole
had a hand in shooting dead one of their constables earlier that year. The shooting of this policeman
had occurred as a result of a clash between two rival Fenian factions in 1882 – one backers of the
IRB’s Supreme Council, the other, Poole’s faction, Stephenites (followers of the exiled leader James
Stephens). The Council faction were trying to kill Poole in a dispute over who controlled weapons
caches in Dublin. Shots were exchanged in the streets after a dispute over which faction would
control a cache of weapons. The only casualty, however, was a DMP policeman named Cox, who was
shot inadvertently when he tried to intervene. A Fenian named Dowling was later charged with the
shooting and served ten years in prison.
When Poole stood trial for the killing of John Kenny, the Crown produced as a witness Poole’s
own brother-in-law, William Lamie, a former Fenian, who testified to the factional divisions within
the Dublin Fenian movement and on Poole’s role in the ‘Vigilance Committee’. However, the case
collapsed with the jury being unable to reach a verdict. A second trial was quickly arranged and the
jury was ‘packed’ with government supporters in order to ensure a conviction and despite no new
evidence being presented, he was duly sentenced to death on November 20th, 1883. His father was
reported to have wept at the verdict and shouted “Joe, Joe”, to which Poole replied, “Keep up father,
keep up, I am ready to die”.
Upon hearing his sentence of death, Poole told the court: “I believe it is on account of being
an enemy, humble as I am, of the Government under which I have the misfortune to live, that I have
been persecuted in the manner I have been. Still I am not afraid to die, or ashamed of what has
brought me to the scaffold. It is not for murder, it is for being a member of the Irish Republican
Brotherhood that has brought me to the scaffold, and I am prepared to die for it”. He called from the
dock for “Three Cheers for the Irish Republic and to Hell with English tyranny!”
Poole was hanged in the Richmond Bridewell on December 18th, 1883. The executioner was a man
named William Jones from Wales. Poole was attended by a priest named Father Donnegan and was
reported to have shown “the utmost fortitude” on the scaffold, “never for a moment ceasing to utter
the response to the prayers” of the priest. He died instantly on being hung, the drop from the scaffold
breaking his neck. When Poole was hung a black flag was raised over the walls of the prison. The
watching crowd, according to the press, gave ‘a wailing cry’. Poole’s body was buried in an unmarked
quicklime grave within the prison.
Poole’s case became a notorious example of injustice in Ireland in the 1880s, as it was widely believed that
he was innocent of the crime for which he was convicted and that the verdict had been achieved by
‘packing’ the jury. The Irish Parliamentary Party, at that time agitating for Home Rule, brought up Poole’s
innocence in the House of Commons. However, public opinion was really roused on the matter when
allegations that Poole’s conviction had been secured by perjury came to light. Frank Grundy, a Fenian

and a friend of Poole, on completion of
a two year prison sentence in August
1884, made a deposition claiming
that he had been twice approached by
the authorities whilst incarcerated, and
offered freedom if he falsely implicated
Poole in the killing of John Kenny.
Grundy said that he had refused. Nor
was this the only allegation of attempts
by Dublin Castle to use perjury to
secure Poole’s conviction. In his speech
from the dock, Joseph Poole himself
had mentioned Lizzy Kearns, Grundy’s
sweetheart, who had been approached
by DMP Superintendent John Mallon
and offered her boyfriend’s freedom
if she swore falsely, but she too had
refused.  A plaque erected to Poole’s memory in Griffith Barracks in 1968.

Poole, the second and the last man to be hanged in the Richmond Bridewell, therefore became a
potent symbol of misgovernment in 19th century Ireland.
During work on the site in the 1890s, as part of its conversion into Wellington Barracks, Joseph Poole’s
body was discovered in a casket marked ‘J.P.’. His father had died shortly beforehand, but Poole’s
step-mother and sisters petitioned Dublin Castle to be allowed to reclaim the body and give it a proper
burial. On the advice of John Mallon of the DMP, their request was turned down. Poole’s body was
instead reburied in another anonymous site within the Barracks.
The Poole family maintained their republican tradition. Four of his brothers served in the Irish Citizen
Army during the Easter Rising of 1916. In 1958, three of Poole’s younger brothers, by that time quite
elderly, approached the Irish Army garrison at what was by then Griffith Barracks in order to try to
exhume Poole’s remains and give him, belatedly, a decent burial. The soldiers in Griffith could not
give them permission to do so, but they returned some weeks later with an exhumation order from
the Department of Defence. However, despite a day of digging behind the barracks’ gymnasium, they
sadly found only an animal bone.
A plaque was erected to his memory in Griffith Barracks in 1968 by the National Graves Association.
In 2007, following correspondence between the Poole family and Diarmuid Hegarty, President of
Griffith College, the plaque, which had been kept in storage, was re-erected.

From prison to barracks
In 1877, the Richmond Bridewell was commandeered by the War Office under the Military Prisons
Act of that year, as a site for a future barracks, but it was not occupied by troops until the 1890s. The
initial cost of the conversion work was £40,000 and another £25,000 was ploughed into erecting an
officers’ mess and living quarters.
The City of Dublin, in 1892, sued the War Department for compensation, claiming that the tax-payers
of the city had put over £96,000 into the Bridewell since its foundation in 1813. The War Office replied
that under the 1877 General Prisons Act, as the site had been used as a prison while War Office
property up to 1887, the Corporation was not entitled to any compensation.
The Corporation had a minor success, however, in claiming that portions of the site belonged to them
and the War Office eventually agreed to pay them an annual rent of £28. Additionally, £137 had to be
paid to the Treasury and £300 to the Grand Canal Company for access to the canal at the rear of the
complex. Further rents had to be paid to two private citizens, I.S. Winter and Jack Doyle, who owned
portions of the site and were respectively paid £83 and £14 per annum.
In 1892, after extensive re-building work, the Richmond Bridewell, now renamed Wellington
Barracks after the Duke of Wellington, was occupied by troops of the Royal Munster Fusiliers, though
re-building was not completed until 11 November 1893. It would be garrisoned by British troops up
to 1922.

