On December 12, 1891, at 8 o’clock in the morning the 1st Battalion, Royal Munster Fusiliers
under the command of Colonel Johnston disembarked at Kingstown (now Dun Laoghaire)
from HMS Assistance and marched to their new quarters at Wellington Barracks, on the site of
the old Richmond Bridewell. They were the first troops to be housed there, beginning almost a century
of military use.
When the Munsters marched in, building work was still underway, so the soldiers had to share the site
with construction workers, who did not finish their work until 11 November 1893.
The Munsters were relieved in late 1892 by the 2nd Battalion of the Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry.
After the Cornwall Light Infantry, Wellington was occupied by battalions from the Sussex Regiment,
and the North Staffords before the Munsters and Cornwalls were rotated through again. From 1900
it was garrisoned by the King’s Liverpool Regiment, The East Lancashire Regiment, a battalion of the
Dublin Fusiliers in 1910, the Royal Fusiliers in 1912, the East Surrey Regiment in 1914 and the Royal
Irish Fusiliers in 1917.

Wellington was designed for occupation by a battalion of about 600 men. Most troops lived in single
soldiers’ quarters, based in the old cell blocks. However a considerable number lived with their families
in the married quarters. The 1911 census returns show 41 families, or around 200 people, living in the
married quarters. One such family, for instance, were the McMurrays. The head of the household was
Robert, a 38 year old soldier who had been born in Belfast. His English-born wife Elizabeth, ten years
his junior, had borne him six children, of whom all but the youngest two, aged 2 and 4 respectively,
could read and write. All had been born in England and belonged to the Church of England.
Daily life in the barracks was a routine of guard duty, inspections and parades, punctuated by war
simulations or manoeuvres and sport. In 1893 for example, it was reported:
‘An Invading force under the command of Major Fisher, 10th Hussars, Marlborough Barracks (drill order
with full dress headdress) was landed near Wicklow on 16th December. It will march north on Dublin
under Lt. Col. Courtney, 1st Royal Sussex Regiment, Wellington Barracks (drill order) will take up a
line of outposts on the probable line of the invaders’ advance the outposts to be in position by 9:15 a.m.’

Two years later, units from Wellington also took part in the Royal Irish Military Tournament in
Ballsbridge, which included displays such as Trooping the Colour, Musical Rides and a March Past,
as well as competitions such as, tent pegging, lemon cutting, wrestling on horseback, boxing and tug
of war, among others. Troops were also kept busy with more conventional team sports. In 1899, the
soccer team of the North Staffords, quartered in Wellington, defeated the Scottish Borderers 4-1 in the
Irish Army Cup. Officers, however, were free to pursue more genteel activities. Two captains, Dease
and Prouse, were reported to have acted in a ‘screaming farce’ entitled A night on the Sugar Loaf, at
the Rotunda Military Fete.

Troops from the barracks were also involved in ceremonial duties such as displays for the coronation
of British monarchs and parading for Royal visits to Dublin; by Edward VII in 1903 and 1904, and by
George V in 1911.

at Le Havre and during the first few months of the war gained honours at Mons, Le Cateau, on the
Marne and on the Aisne. By the end of the year, the British regulars had suffered horrific losses, such
that in some units of 1,000 men only 30 remained neither killed nor wounded by the close of the year.
This amounted to a casualty rate of over 90% among the original British Expeditionary Force that had
been sent to France.
From the outset Lord Kitchener, the Minister for War in the British Cabinet, recognised that it would
be a long war and called for a million volunteers. The response across the UK was immediate and
men thronged the recruiting offices and barracks throughout Britain. Dublin was in a more complex
situation than most cities in the United Kingdom, however. Ireland was in the midst of a deepening
political crisis over the introduction of Home Rule. On July 26, just over a week before Britain’s entry
into the war, the Irish Volunteers had illegally landed rifles at Howth and in subsequent disturbances
in Dublin city, British troops had shot dead three people and injured 37. Nevertheless, the troops such
as the East Surreys who departed Dublin in August 1914 generally got a warm send-off. The Irish
Times reported, “The scenes in Dublin during the embarkation cannot fail to have been cheering and
encouraging to the gallant soldiers... From the early hours of the morning large crowds assembled on
the quays to cheer the troops on their way and to wish them God-speed on their adventure. The main
thoroughfares through which the troops passed were lined with spectators and on all sides indications
were given of popular sympathy and goodwill.”

Aided by the call of Irish Parliamentary Party Leader, John Redmond, for Irish nationalists to enlist in
the military to fight for small nations and for Irish Home Rule, over 21,000 Dubliners joined up in the
first two years of the war and 25,644 served in total from 1914-1918. Intensive recruitment efforts in
Ireland continued throughout the war and while enlistment figures lagged somewhat behind Britain
itself, some 130,000 men volunteered for military service.
Wellington Barracks was used a recruiting centre and training depot for troops being sent to France.
However, by 1916 it was sparsely occupied by a garrison of about 100 men. Frank Laird, an Irishman
serving in the British Army, described the barracks’ population as, “about a hundred old crocks, who
formed the nucleus of a garrison battalion”.

The Easter Rising
Unknown to the barracks’ garrison, just down the South Circular Road the 3rd Battalion of the Irish
Volunteers Dublin Brigade was preparing for insurrection in April of that year. They assembled, on
Easter Sunday, at nearby Emerald Square and proceeded to occupy South Dublin Union, now St
James’s Hospital, and other posts in the vicinity as part of the Easter Rising.
Two young Volunteers were sent to make sure that troops inside Wellington were not being mobilised
against them. One of the Volunteers’ scouts, Robert Holland, turned up at one of the Volunteers’ posts
at Marrowbone Lane, having forgotten to check the barracks. He recalled:
[Volunteer officer Con] Colbert then took all my equipment from me and handed me a .38 nickel-plated
revolver with about 20 rounds of ammunition. He says “What about your job on the barracks?” I told
him it would take me two minutes from the South Circular Road entrance of Wellington Barracks to
the Cork Street entrance of Ardee Street Brewery ... [He] said to go to the gate of Wellington Barracks
and to watch the military and if I saw anything suspicious such as troops forming up on the Square or
the filling up of cars with troops, and if anything like this occurred previous to 11.15 I was immediately
to return to Emerald Square. If nothing occurred I was to stay there until two minutes to twelve and
then proceed to Ardee Street Brewery. I proceeded to Wellington Barracks as directed and stayed there.
Nothing abnormal occurred and I left two minutes to twelve and went to Ardee Street Brewery.

In fact the troops in Wellington, even had they known that rebellion was breaking
out, were in no position to do anything about it. Inside the barracks, the meagre
garrison had initially just six rifles between them, their arms having for some
reason been transferred elsewhere some nights before.
Frank Laird, an officer in the Dublin Fusiliers, was stationed in the Royal Barracks
(subsequently Collins Barracks and now the National Museum) on the north side of the River Liffey
but had been visiting family in Rathmines when the fighting broke out. Cycling back towards the
Royal Barracks, he skirted around fighting taking place at the bridge over the Grand Canal near
Portobello Barracks and was directed for his own safety by a British officer into Wellington. There
he found the under strength and poorly armed garrison and “another hundred waifs and strays like
myself, who had blown in”.
One soldier suggested retiring to the upper floors of the barracks so that the rebels might leave them
alone. Another complained that he had brought his wife and family to Dublin to escape German air
raids, only to now find them in the middle of a rebellion. Fortunately for them, the complex was not
attacked during the week’s fighting and more arms were sent to Wellington in the following days.
A patrol dispatched from the barracks up towards Wexford Street was fired on, losing one dead and
one wounded. Frank Laird recalled, “A ration party of a sergeant and three men... walked into a trap

down some side street. Fire was opened on them suddenly from the houses and one man was shot
through the head. Another man ran straight ahead and disappeared”. He later, sheepishly, returned to
the barracks in civilian clothes.
On the other side, a Volunteer named Seamus Kavanagh stationed in Jacob’s biscuit factory heard that
British troops were advancing along Camden Street, as if to launch an attack on Jacob’s:
When I had reported this information to the Countess Markievicz, Tom Donoghue and a Citizen Army
man whose name I cannot remember, and myself were ordered to proceed along Cuffe Street. Just as
we reached Fanning’s, the chandlers, we saw the head of the British column at the Cuffe St. end of
Wexford St. We lay down, and opened fire on them, wounding about three of them, whom I saw falling.
They seemed to scatter in all directions. They were 6 British “Tommies” being marched along Wexford
St. We fell back on the Green then. We expected them to come down Montague St. and attack us at
Harcourt St., but we got word that they had returned to Wellington Barracks (now Griffith Barracks).
They probably had been out scouting.

Another British officer in the barracks later accidentally shot himself in the leg. Wellington also came
under sniper fire. According to Laird, “An industrious sniper took his station each evening about seven
o’clock at the corner house up the road and did his best to pick off the sentry at the gate. A few barrels
filled with earth frustrated this project but our friend persisted night after night for an hour or two”.
They raided the houses in the area but could not find the sniper.
According to Volunteer accounts, long range machine gun fire from the barracks was directed at the
insurgent position at Jacob’s biscuit factory, while according to Laird, at least one civilian, an unlucky
rector of a nearby church who had climbed the steeple to watch the battle, was shot in the arm by a
lieutenant. Some troops from Wellington manned a checkpoint at the Rialto Bridge over the Canal,
where they arrested a number of Volunteers trying to join the rebel garrison at South Dublin Union.
It was not until the following Sunday, when the insurgents in South Dublin Union and Jacob’s Factory
had surrendered, that the garrison of Wellington could emerge safely from behind the walls of the
barracks. Damage in the immediate area had been slight, but elsewhere much of central Dublin lay in
ruins and up to 500 people, around half of them civilians, lay dead.

Losing rifles to the Volunteers 1917-18
Subsequently, as peaceful conditions returned to Dublin, the Barracks resumed its normal role.
However, by mid-1917, with the prisoners from the Rising already released, conflict was again in the
air. The Irish Volunteers, soon to be called the Irish Republican Army or IRA, prepared for guerrilla
warfare against British troops in the Irish capital by rearming, often at the expense of the armoury in
Wellington Barracks. Even before the 1916 Rising, a young 3rd Battalion Volunteer named Joe Brophy,
who was also employed as a telegraph messenger, stole and bought rifles off soldiers in Wellington.

On one occasion he even stole a pair of binoculars from a Major O’Hara at the barracks.
An IRA quartermaster named Kit Farrell, with the aid of a sympathetic Irish serviceman called Edward
Handley, bought and smuggled over 100 rifles and thousands of rounds of ammunition out of the
barracks – ferrying the weapons over the canal at the rear of the complex by night in small batches in
late 1917 and early 1918.
Edward Handley was a Dublin Fusilier on leave from France, where he had been wounded, and
stationed with the Labour Corps at Wellington Barracks, where he served as a storeman with access
to the armoury. He got in touch with Farrell through a mutual friend in the Irish Citizen Army. Handley
recalled: I was later transferred to a newly formed Labour Corps at Wellington Barracks where I was again
able to pass out rifles at the back gate near Harold’s Cross Bridge. A military policeman who had been
transferred from Portobello with me knew what I was doing and was sympathetic. I always chose the
time he was on duty at the back gate to pass out the rifles. In Wellington Barracks there were huts where
men used to go for lectures on wet days. They often left their rifles outside the huts and it was an easy
matter to take a few. As I was a storeman I did not attract undue attention when walking around with the

rifles. The men, of course, had to pay for the lost rifles and this generally seemed to satisfy the authorities,
although there were periodical searches of traders vans here also. My military policeman friend always
gave notice of any searches that were to take place.

He later played up his patriotic motives in helping to arm the Volunteers but it was also clear that he
was well paid for his activities. According to Joseph O’Connor, an IRA officer in the 3rd Battalion:
About this time, the Quartermaster, Christie Farrell, of “A” Company, got in touch with some British
soldiers stationed in Wellington Barracks, what is now known as Griffith Barracks. They were willing
to hand over rifles and ammunition on the payment of a very small sum per rifle and per packet of
ammunition, each packet containing fifty rounds; the price in either case never exceeded £1.
This was a very valuable source of supply to us and we succeeded in getting up to 100 rifles and probably
1,000 rounds of ammunition before the discovery was made. The procedure adopted was, and this in the
depth of winter, that our men should swim the canal from Parnell Road to the iron railings surrounding
Wellington Barracks.

Christie ‘Kit’ Farrell, the quartermaster, left the most detailed account of the operation:
The Grand Canal forms the rear boundary of the barracks which is situated between the bridges Harold’s Cross and Sally’s Bridge. Inside barrack railings, at a point almost opposite to Greenmount
Lane (on the opposite side of the canal) is a small red-bricked house known as the Schoolmaster’s
House. This house offered cover to both myself and the contact on the inside. It was decided that I would
swim across the canal at this point. The rifles were to be passed out under the bottom bar of the railings.
Time - 1 o’clock - striking by clock in the barrack tower. Signal – three low whistles.
Next morning at 00.50 hours, seven men arrived at Greenmount Lane. Each man knew his job; everything
in the vicinity was normal. Gas lamps bordering the road were dimmed by men detailed for that job. I
swam across the canal. From my position on the canal bank I could see the light shining from the
Guardroom and hear the measured tread of the sentry across the barrack square. As the barrack clock
struck the hour, I gave the signal and received the answer and was in possession of three rifles. The
Operation was definitely on. I strapped the rifles on my back, using the slings, and swam back to the
boys. I was helped out. Very shortly the rifles were on their way to the dump at Jimmie Murray’s home.
I made about 14 crossings on different nights on this plan, out of which we obtained about 50 rifles.
It was winter and on several occasions I swam through a thin coating of ice. On one occasion I was
about half-way across when I received the danger signal. I had four rifles strapped on my back and had
to remain longer than usual in the water. I was seized with cramp and was taken from the water by
Peadar O’Meara. The cause of the danger signal was a couple of soldiers who, accompanied by their lady
friends, arrived at the spot where I had intended to land. They would select that spot to say goodnight.
They were soon got rid of by Jimmie Murray who proceeded to mend an imaginary puncture in the wheel
of his cycle. We now received our first setback. Our inside contact was suspicious of things inside and
requested us to lay off until we heard from him.

Wellington Barracks from the canal c.1900. (Courtesy of the National Library of Ireland)
During the waiting period we decided to change our plan and work from the front of the barracks. About
a week elapsed before we received the all clear from the soldiers. I explained the change of plan to our
contact. He pointed out the fact that, though it was a quicker means of getting the rifles away, it exposed
to greater danger the men working on the outside as they would be practically in full view of the sentry
and could be seen quite easily. The risk was ours. We took it.
The main entrance to Wellington Barracks was on the South Circular Road. Inside the gate was situated
the guardroom and a sentry post. About 50 yards from this post towards Leonard’s Corner is another
gate which is more or less covered by the shadow of a block of buildings facing the road. It was through
this gate we proposed the rifles should be passed to us. Our first attempt here was so successful that we
carried on at intervals for about six weeks. In spite of the close proximity of the sentry, rifles were passed
through the bars of the gate, carried across the road and dispatched to the dump. Very shortly, and very
unfortunate for us, this regiment was transferred elsewhere. The entire operation gave us over 100 rifles
and some ammunition.

During the War of Independence
In November 1918, Wellington Barracks hosted a military display for the children of the Liberties to
celebrate the end of the First World War. However, just over a month later the Sinn Fein party swept
the boards in the Irish General Election, pledging not only to renounce Irish participation in the
British military, but to break the connection completely between Britain and Ireland. They declared an
Irish Republic and their parliament, the Dáil, met in Dublin for the first time in January 1919.
British efforts to suppress this republic and the parallel attempts of the IRA to hamstring the British
administration led gradually to a situation of guerrilla warfare which we now call the Irish War of
Independence. In Dublin until late 1920, this mainly consisted of assassinations of selected British
Army and Dublin Metropolitan Police intelligence operatives by a select IRA unit named the Squad
under Michael Collins – most famously on Bloody Sunday in November 1920, when they killed
fourteen British soldiers and policemen in one night. However, from late 1920, the Volunteer or IRA
Battalions in the city were also instructed to form Active Service Units or ASUs and to attack British
troops in the streets.
From early 1921 to July of that year, the garrison at Wellington was harassed by small scale guerrilla
attacks by the ASU of the Dublin IRA 3rd Battalion while on their patrols. Typically the IRA men used
revolvers and grenades, which were easy to conceal and could be used in cramped urban conditions.
During this time, Wellington was garrisoned by the 1st Battalion of the Prince of Wales’ Volunteers
and then by a battalion of the South Lancashire regiment.
IRA statements record at least three ambushes of patrols from Wellington in the immediate vicinity of
the barracks. Joseph McGuiness, one of the ASU fighters recalled:
Early in March, 1921, the section staged an ambush on a British foot patrol of about twenty-five men who
were patrolling the area from Inchicore via Rialto Bridge to Wellington Barracks, South Circular Road.

There were further ambushes of troops from the barracks on the South Circular Road and Harold’s
Cross, though the attackers were not sure if any casualties had been caused.
Not far from Wellington Barracks, the Wexford Street/ Camden Street/ Aungier Street/ George’s Street
thoroughfare became known as the ‘Dardanelles’ (after the 1915 campaign in the First World War),
such was the frequency of IRA gun and grenade attacks on British troops passing to and from the city
centre to the barracks at Portobello and Wellington. The ambushes, mostly carried out by Volunteers
from the 3rd Battalion, were a danger to civilians as well as British personnel, killing at least two. On
16 March 1921, a troop lorry from Wellington barracks, carrying soldiers from the South Lancashire
Regiment, was hit by two grenades hurled from overlooking buildings on Wexford Street, killing two
of the British soldiers, Lance Corporal Jarvis and Private G. Thomas and wounding six, one of whom,
Private Whiting, died from his wounds two days later.
The War of Independence did not see any large scale military actions in Dublin, but did see some 300
people lose their lives in the city and over 4,000 arrested. The IRA could never attempt to drive the
British troops from barracks such as Wellington. Rather, their strategy was to continually harass them
and therefore to apply further pressure for a political settlement.
To an extent this succeeded. Under the terms of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, signed on 6 December 1921,
the British military were to evacuate all their posts in the southern 26 counties of Ireland and to
hand them over to the newly created Irish Free State. The period of British military use of Wellington
Barracks was coming to an end.

